J-04 SELECT INTERVENTION STRATEGIES BASED ON CLIENT PREFERENCES.

The importance and ethical necessity of basing intervention strategies on client preferences
As behavior analysts, it is our ethical responsibility to continually put our client’s needs first, and this includes, considering which type of intervention may be more preferred by the clients we serve. As Bailey and Burch (2011) state, one of our core ethical principles is treating others with care and compassion and this encompasses giving our clients choices (Bailey & Burch, 2011).

Historically, consideration of client preferences is an area that within behavior analysis, perhaps has not been given as much attention as it deserves. In one area of study, Hanley, Piazza, Fisher, Contrucci & Maglieri (1997) reported that, “few if any studies have examined the social acceptability of or consumer preferences” for the relevant treatment options but had instead given more weight to the opinions of the caregivers as opposed to those of the client (Hanley et al., 1997, p. 460). Another interesting train of thought has been that “choice making is often not taught” (Bannerman, Sheldon, Sherman, & Harchik, 1990, p. 81).

Write another example:















Questions to ask your supervisor:















Another reason for considering clients’ preferences over treatment options is it may make the intervention more successful. Data from Miltenberger, Suda, Lennox and Lindeman (1991) indicated it was very important for successful treatment, to consider client preferences when selecting interventions. Findings from many other studies have also supported this premise (e.g., Berk, 1976; Hanley, Piazza, Fisher, & Maglieri, 2005; Mendonca & Brehm, 1983; Perlmuter & Montry, 1973).

Selecting interventions based on client preferences 
There are methods reported in the literature for determining which treatment method is more preferred by a client*. As such, once it has been established that an intervention is necessary to treat a behavior, it is imperative then to consider assessing a client’s preference for one treatment option over others to assist with the behavior change program. In this way, treatment is more likely to be successful, will likely have more social validity (Schwartz & Baer, 1991) and will be meeting more of our ethical standards as behavior analysts.



























Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J. & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts, 2nd ed. New York, London: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Bannerman, D. J., Sheldon, J. B., Sherman, J. A., & Harchik, A. E. (1990). Balancing the right to habilitation with the right to personal liberties: The rights of people with developmental disabilities to eat too many doughnuts and take a nap. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 23, 79–89. 
Berk, R. A. (1976). Effects of choice of instructional methods on verbal learning tasks. Psychological Reports, 38, 867-870.
Hanley, G. P., Piazza, C. C., Fisher, W. W., Contrucci, S. A. & Maglieri, K. A. (1997). Evaluation of client preferences for function-based treatment packages. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30, 459-473.
Hanley, G. P., Piazza, C. C., Fisher, W. W. & Maglieri, K. A. (2005). On The Effectiveness of And Preference For Punishment And Extinction Components Of Function-Based Interventions. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 38, 51-65.
Mendonca, P. J. & Brehm, S. S. (1983). Effects of choice on behavioral treatment of overweight children. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 1, 343-358.
Miltenberger, R. G., Suda, K. T., Lennox, D. B. & Lindeman, D. P. (1991). Assessing the acceptability of behavioral treatments to persons with mental retardation. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 96, 291–298.
Perlmuter, L. C. & Montry, R. A. (1973). Effect of choice of stimulus on paired-associate learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 99, 120-123.

Related Lessons:
E-08: Use the matching law and recognize factors influencing choice
I-07: Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoire
J-06: Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments
J-07: Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention

Footnotes
*1 See Hanley, Piazza, Fisher, Contrucci & Maglieri (1997) and Miltenberger, Suda, Lennox & Lindeman (1991) for more information about how to test clients’ preferences for different interventions.

Notes:
