FK-06 PRAGMATISM

Definition (Pragmatism): 

 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
Gloria was looking for a reinforcement program for her classroom because her students were not turning their homework in on time. She consulted with the district BCBA and was able to come up with an effective and simple class-wide reinforcement program that helped her students to turn their homework on time.

Non-Example:
Richard was a first grade teacher and wanted to represent his student’s data using a scatterplot graph. However, he did not have previous training in this area and was unable to accomplish this task. He felt that this method for graphical display was too difficult to figure out.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J.S. (2000). A futurist perspective for applied behavior analysis. In J. Austin & J.E. Carr (Eds.), Handbook of applied behavior analysis (pp. 473-488). Reno, NV: Context Press.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  19, 22. 
Heward, W.L. (2005). Reasons applied behavior analysis is good for education and why those reasons have been insufficient. In W.L. Heward, T.E. Heron, N.A. Neef, S.M. Peterson, , D.M. Sainato, G. Cartledge, R. Gardner, III, L.D. Peterson, S.B. Hersh, & J.C. Dardig (Eds.), Focus on behavior analysis in education: Achievements, challenges, and opportunities (pp. 316-348). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall.

Related Lessons:
B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
G-04: Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-06: Provide behavior analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
K-08: Establish support for behavior-analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.

Notes:
