FK-04 EMPIRICISM

Definition (Determinism): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Definition (Determinism): 



(Fisher, 2011).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
Mr. Johnson, a BCBA, conducts a functional analysis to determine the function of Billy’s aggressive behavior in class. He completes rating scales, interviews, and other indirect assessment procedures, but doesn’t use these to guess the reinforcer for Billy’s aggression.  Mr. Johnson uses the indirect assessment procedures to inform his experiment. He designs a pairwise functional analysis and runs out several phases of direct observation until results are conclusive. He concludes that Billy’s aggressive behavior is sensitive to attention as a maintaining variable. At the IEP meeting, Billy’s parents applaud Mr. Johnson’s empiricism for completing such a thorough assessment and analyzing all the possible factors before determining a function. 

Non-Example: 
Mr. Riley is a district BCBA and has been asked to conduct a functional behavior assessment for Mary in regards to her aggressive behavior. Mr. Riley hypothesizes that Mary is engaging in aggressive behavior to get access to her dolls because all little girls like dolls. Based on his reasoning he has already decided that Mary’s aggression is maintained by access to dolls. Since he already has a strong hypothesis for the function of aggression, Mr. Riley writes a report and creates a treatment for Mary.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  5, 22, 159.
Baer, D.M., Wolf, M.M., & Risley, T.R. (1968). Some Current Dimensions of Applied Behavior Analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 1, 91-97. 
Fisher, W.W., Piazza, C. C., Roane, H. S. (2011). Handbook of Applied Behavior Analysis. The Guildford Press, New York London.
Schmidt, F.L. (1992). What do data really mean? Research findings, meta-analysis, and cumulative knowledge in psychology. American Psychologist, 47, 10, 1173-1181.

Related Lessons:
B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
H-01: Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
H-03: Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-03: Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
I-05: Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-15: Base decision making on data displayed in various formats.
K-07: Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.
FK-10: Behavior, response, response class.


For this assignment, deliver the following:

0. Complete any definitions missing above

1. Write another example

2. List questions to ask your supervisor

3. Add any notes for yourself (optional)




