FK-05 PARSIMONY

Definition (Parsimony): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
A non-verbal client hits her head repeatedly for a period of days each month. Although the analyst considered multiple environmental antecedent and consequent factors that might influence the client’s behavior, she first looked at the calendar to see if the client’s head hitting each month corresponded to her monthly menstrual cycle. She found that head-hitting occurred the last days immediately before her period began and the first day of her period. The analyst asked a nurse to review the data and recommend a medical intervention before the analyst continued to assess the influence of external environmental factors.

An analyst was asked to design strategies for staff when responding to a client’s aggressive behavior after asking him to brush his teeth. He reviewed the data staff had recorded about self-care behaviors and saw that aggression was a relatively new behavior during teeth-brushing. He learned that the client became aggressive toward staff shortly after they began buying a discounted toothpaste instead of the client’s usual brand. When the analyst offered the client a choice between the two brands, the client chose his old brand and aggression did not occur after asking him to brush his teeth.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  113-122.
Etzel, B. C., & LeBlanc, J. M. (1979). The simplest treatment alternative: The law of parsimony applied to choosing appropriate instructional control and errorless-learning procedures for the difficult-to-teach child. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 9(4), 361-382.

Related Lessons: 
FK-01: Lawfulness of behavior.
FK-02: Selectionism (phylogenic, ontogenic, cultural)
FK-03: Determinism
FK-04: Empiricism
FK-06: Pragmatism



For this assignment, deliver the following:

0. Complete any definitions missing above

1. Write another example

2. List questions to ask your supervisor

3. Add any notes for yourself (optional)

