FK-06 PRAGMATISM

Definition (Pragmatism): 

 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
Gloria was looking for a reinforcement program for her classroom because her students were not turning their homework in on time. She consulted with the district BCBA and was able to come up with an effective and simple class-wide reinforcement program that helped her students to turn their homework on time.

Non-Example:
Richard was a first grade teacher and wanted to represent his student’s data using a scatterplot graph. However, he did not have previous training in this area and was unable to accomplish this task. He felt that this method for graphical display was too difficult to figure out.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J.S. (2000). A futurist perspective for applied behavior analysis. In J. Austin & J.E. Carr (Eds.), Handbook of applied behavior analysis (pp. 473-488). Reno, NV: Context Press.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  19, 22. 
Heward, W.L. (2005). Reasons applied behavior analysis is good for education and why those reasons have been insufficient. In W.L. Heward, T.E. Heron, N.A. Neef, S.M. Peterson, , D.M. Sainato, G. Cartledge, R. Gardner, III, L.D. Peterson, S.B. Hersh, & J.C. Dardig (Eds.), Focus on behavior analysis in education: Achievements, challenges, and opportunities (pp. 316-348). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall.

Related Lessons:
B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
G-04: Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-06: Provide behavior analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
K-08: Establish support for behavior-analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.
FK-05 PARSIMONY

Definition (Parsimony): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
A non-verbal client hits her head repeatedly for a period of days each month. Although the analyst considered multiple environmental antecedent and consequent factors that might influence the client’s behavior, she first looked at the calendar to see if the client’s head hitting each month corresponded to her monthly menstrual cycle. She found that head-hitting occurred the last days immediately before her period began and the first day of her period. The analyst asked a nurse to review the data and recommend a medical intervention before the analyst continued to assess the influence of external environmental factors.

An analyst was asked to design strategies for staff when responding to a client’s aggressive behavior after asking him to brush his teeth. He reviewed the data staff had recorded about self-care behaviors and saw that aggression was a relatively new behavior during teeth-brushing. He learned that the client became aggressive toward staff shortly after they began buying a discounted toothpaste instead of the client’s usual brand. When the analyst offered the client a choice between the two brands, the client chose his old brand and aggression did not occur after asking him to brush his teeth.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  113-122.
Etzel, B. C., & LeBlanc, J. M. (1979). The simplest treatment alternative: The law of parsimony applied to choosing appropriate instructional control and errorless-learning procedures for the difficult-to-teach child. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 9(4), 361-382.

Related Lessons: 
FK-01: Lawfulness of behavior.
FK-02: Selectionism (phylogenic, ontogenic, cultural)
FK-03: Determinism
FK-04: Empiricism
FK-06: Pragmatism



For this assignment, deliver the following:

0. Complete any definitions missing above

1. Write another example

2. List questions to ask your supervisor

3. Add any notes for yourself (optional)

