A-12 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT CONTINUOUS MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES (E.G., EVENT RECORDING)

Definition (Event Recording): 






 





(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Examples:
Contexts that are likely to be appropriate for an event recording procedure: 
Property destruction that typically occurs two to five times a week. 
Correct responses to the question, “What do you want?” when asked in at least six distributed trials each day. 

Contexts that may be inappropriate for an event recording procedure: 
Vocal Stereotypy that occurs on and off so rapidly that an observer would not be able to accurately determine the start and end of the stereotypy.
Aggressive behavior in a classroom setting with one teacher, who must conduct instruction, interact with other students, and count hitting behavior that often includes multiple students.  
An observer may increase counting accuracy by using a counting device with low-technology (i.e., masking tape around the wrist for tally marks or a golf-stroke counter or with high technology (i.e., IPad or laptop direct observation programs). 



Write another example:










Questions to ask your supervisor:












Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Kelly, M. B. (1977). A review of the observational data‐collection and reliability procedures reported in the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10(1), 97-101.
Sasso, G. M., Reimers, T. M., Cooper, L. J., Wacker, D., Berg, W., Steege, M., ... & Allaire, A. (1992). Use of descriptive and experimental analyses to identify the functional properties of aberrant behavior in school settings. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25(4), 809-821.

Related Lessons: 
A-09 Evaluate the accuracy and reliability of measurement procedures. 
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording. 
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms. 
FK-47 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g. rate, duration, latency, interresponse time). 
FK-48 State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g. partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling.) 

Notes:
