A - 13 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT DISCONTINUOUS MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES (E.G., PARTIAL & WHOLE INTERVAL RECORDING, MOMENTARY TIME SAMPLING)

Definition:
“Time sampling refers to a variety of methods for observing and recording behavior during intervals or at specific moments in time. The basic procedure involves dividing the observation period into time intervals and then recording the presence or absence of behavior within or at the end of interval. Three forms of time sampling used often by applied behavior analysts are whole-interval recording, partial-interval recording and momentary time sampling (Cooper, Heron and Heward, 2007, p.90).” 
Whole-Interval Recording
“Once the interval has ended, the observer records whether the behavior has occurred throughout the entire interval. Whole-interval recording tends to underestimate how much a behavior is occurring because the behavior has to be emitted for the entire interval in order to get recorded.” (Cooper, Heron and Heward, 2007, p. 90)
Partial-Interval Recording
“With the partial-interval recording method, the time of observation is again divided into intervals and a behavior is recorded as having occurred if it has occurred at some point during the interval. Data are usually reported as percentage of intervals.” (Cooper, Heron and Heward, 2007, p. 92)
Momentary Time Sampling
“With this type of measurement, a period of time is divided up into intervals and the observer records whether the behavior is occurring at the precise moment the interval ends.”  (Cooper, Heron and Heward, 2007, p. 93).

Examples:
Whole-Interval Recording:
Hand-flapping: student moves one or both hands repeatedly and rapidly by bending at the wrist, such that fingers move more than 2 inches. Non-example: waving hand to say “hello” or “goodbye.”
An observer divides a 5-minute observation period into intervals of 5 seconds. A student flaps his hands for the entire 5-second interval. At the end of the 5-second interval, the observer records the behavior as having occurred.

Partial-Interval Recording:
Calling-out behavior in a pupil: student raises voice above conversation level when not called on by teacher.
A 30-minute observation period is divided into one-minute intervals.  At the end of the one minute interval, the behavior is recorded as having occurred because the pupil called-out after the first 30 seconds of the interval.
Momentary Time Sampling: 
Movie watching: client is seated, and head and eyes are oriented toward screen.
An observer is measuring a client’s engagement with a movie across a 2-minute period. The 2-minute period is divided up into 5-second intervals. The observer records the behavior as being present at the end of the first 5-second interval as the client was watching the movie appropriately at that specific point in time. 

Write another example:




















Questions to ask your supervisor:

























Relevant Literature:
Daboul-Meany, M. G., Roscoe, E. M., Bourret, J. C., Ahearn, W. H. (2007). A comparison of momentary time sampling and partial-interval recording for evaluating functional relations. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 40 (3), 501-514.
Powell, J., Martindale, A., & KuIp, S. (1975). An evaluation of time-sample measures of behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 463-469.
Suen, H. K., Ary, D., & Covalt, W. (1991). Reappraisal of momentary time sampling and partial-interval recording. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24, 803-804. 




Related Lessons:
A-12: Design and implement continuous measurement procedures (e.g., event recording)
H-01: Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording
I-01: Define the behavior in observable and measurable terms
FK-47: Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, interresponse time)
FK-48: State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling)

Notes:
