Segment 8 – Group Supervision Meeting Agenda
Meeting Topic: Continuous versus Discontinuous Measurement.

Task List Items Reviewed:
A-12: Design and implement continuous measurement procedures (e.g., event recording).
A-13: Design and implement discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial & whole interval, momentary time sampling).
FK-47: Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, inter-response time).
FK-48: State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling).

1. Housekeeping 
Upon entry to meeting have supervisees hand in the previous week’s homework assignment and discuss several “Housekeeping Items” related to supervision.
Take attendance for the meeting.
State the duration of today’s meeting (90 minutes).
Distribute BACB® experience forms to supervisees. 
2. Task List Lesson and Discussion
Discuss task list item A-12: Design and implement continuous measurement procedures (e.g., event recording). 
Discuss task list item A-01: Measure frequency (i.e., count). 
Discuss task list item A-13: Design and implement discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial & whole interval, momentary time sampling).
Discuss task list item FK-47: Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, inter-response time). 
Discuss task list item FK-48: State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling).
3.  Homework Review
Review homework that was assigned at the previous supervision meeting.
4. Questions
Answer any questions related to the homework or topics discussed. 
5. Closing Notes
Assign Homework (task list boxes, presentation) from today’s segment, due at next group meeting
Close the meeting by inviting supervisees to request topics to be covered in upcoming meetings.