G-04 EXPLAIN BEHAVIORAL CONCEPTS USING NONTECHNICAL LANGUAGE.

It is important for a behavior analyst to have a strong verbal repertoire when speaking about the science of behavior analysis. Jargon used in journals, universities, and with other behavior analysts is valuable to promote effective action on the part of the listener with precise discriminative control. 

That being said, Skinner wrote that we should choose words for the effects they have on the listener (Skinner, 1957) and unless that listener has extensive training in behavior analysis, our use of technical language will “fall on deaf ears” and not produce effective action. When speaking with client family members, friends, or professionals from other closely related fields, it is important to remember that your verbal behavior is for the benefit of your audience. Bailey (1991) describes this phenomenon well:

“In our zeal to be scientific, we have stressed the need to match the requirements of science in our writing and publishing. Although this has given us much-needed academic credibility (faculty can be promoted and tenured by publishing in JABA) it doesn't help at all in selling our technology to the masses” (p. 446)

During the supervision process, spend considerable amounts of time, working on precise definitions for technical terms. This benefits the supervisees in several ways. It allows him/her to behave effectively as a listener and speaker when interacting with other behavior analysts in the field. It will also promote accurate translations to nontechnical language. If a precise definition is practiced, a less technical, more layperson-friendly definition will be easier to describe and it will be more likely to be accurate.

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:




















Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J. S. (1991). Marketing behavior analysis requires different talk. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24(3), 445-448.
Lindsley, O. R. (1991). From technical jargon to plain English for application.Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24(3), 449-458.
Malott, R. W. (1992). Should we train applied behavior analysts to be researchers?. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 25(1), 83-88.Skinner B.F. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1957.

Related Lessons:
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
K-01 Provide for ongoing documentation of behavioral services.
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-08 Establish support for behavior-analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09 Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.

Notes:
