E-03 USE INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES.
Definition: 
Rules are descriptions of behavioral contingencies (e.g., “Putting a sweater on when it is cold outside will help you stay warm”).  When rules are followed, behavior can come under the control of delayed or indirect consequences therefore resulting in rule-governed behavior.  Malott and Trojan-Suarez (2004) suggest that all instructions involve rules.  It is argued that rules function as reinforcement-based or punishment-based discriminative stimuli (Malott & Trojan-Suarez, 2004). Skinner (1969) referred to rules, instructions, advice, and laws as contingency-specifying stimuli, describing the

  relations of everyday life.
Evidence that behavior is the result of instructional control or rule following is provided if: (1) there is no obvious or immediate consequence of the behavior; (2) the delivery of the consequence following the behavior exceeds 30 seconds; (3) behavior changes without reinforcement; (4) a substantial increase in the rate of behavior occurs following one instance of direct contact with reinforcement; and (5) the rule exists but no consequence (including automatic reinforcement) exists following the behavior (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Example:
Incomplete rules (e.g., “Stop it”) provide minimal instruction (e.g., stop) and imply an outcome (e.g., you might get in trouble).

Write another example:
























Questions to ask your supervisor:




















Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Positive reinforcement. Applied Behavior Analysis (pp. 256-290). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hayes, S. C. (2004). Rule-Governed Behavior: Cognition, Contingencies & Instructional Control. Oakland, CA: Context Press.
Malott, R. W., & Trojan Suarez, E.A. (2004). Analogs to reinforcement and avoidance part 1. Principles of Behavior (pp. 377-393). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Malott, R. W., & Trojan Suarez, E.A. (2004). Analogs to reinforcement and avoidance part 2. Principles of Behavior (pp. 394-409). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Skinner, B. F. (1969). Contingencies of reinforcement: A theoretical analysis. New York: Appleton-Centrury-Crofts.

Related Lessons:
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement.
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment.
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly.
FK-30 distinguish between motivating operation and reinforcement effects
FK-31 behavioral contingencies
FK-33 functional relations
FK-41 contingency-shaped behavior
FK-42 rule-governed behavior

Notes: