Segment 17 – Group Supervision Meeting Agenda
Meeting Topic: Interventions

Task List Items Reviewed:
C-03: State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of extinction.
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.
J-03: Select intervention strategies based on task analysis.J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-06: Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07: Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
FK-22: Extinction.

1. Housekeeping 
Upon entry to meeting have supervisees hand in the previous week’s homework assignment and discuss several “Housekeeping Items” related to supervision.
Take attendance for the meeting.
State the duration of today’s meeting (90 minutes).
Distribute BACB® experience forms to supervisees. 
2. Task List Lesson and Discussion
Discuss task list item C-03: State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of extinction.
Discuss task list item J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
Discuss task list item J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
Discuss task list item J-03: Select intervention strategies based on task analysis.
Discuss task list item J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
Discuss task list item J-06: Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
Discuss task list item J-07: Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
Discuss task list item J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
Discuss task list item FK-22: Extinction.
3.  Homework Review
Review homework that was assigned at the previous supervision meeting.
4. Questions
Answer any questions related to the homework or topics discussed. 
5. Closing Notes
Assign Homework (task list boxes, presentation) from today’s segment, due at next group meeting
Close the meeting by inviting supervisees to request topics to be covered in upcoming meetings. 