J-01 STATE INTERVENTION GOALS IN OBSERVEABLE AND MEASUREABLE TERMS.

“Target behaviors are selected for study in applied behavior analysis because of their importance to the people involved. Applied behavior analysts attempt to increase, maintain, and generalize adaptive, desirable behaviors and decrease the occurrence of maladaptive, undesirable behaviors” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 69).

Van Houten (1979) cited in Cooper et al. (2007, p. 69) suggests “two basic approaches to determining socially valid goals: (a) Assess the performance of people judged to be highly competent, and (b) experimentally manipulate different levels of performance to determine empirically which produces optimal results. Regardless of the method used, specifying treatment goals before intervention begins providing a guideline for continuing or terminating treatment. Further, setting objective, predetermined goals helps to eliminate disagreements or biases among those involved in evaluating a program’s effectiveness.”

Examples:
The intervention goal: Client’s aggression will decrease by 80% of baseline levels across 5 consecutive school days. Staff will record every instance of hitting across the school day on the data collection sheet. 
The intervention goal: Client will expressively identify 10 different colors with 80% accuracy, across 3 consecutive days. Staff will record data on correct and incorrect responses.

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:















Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Houten, R. V. (1979). Social validation: The evolution of standards of competency for target behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 12(4), 581-591

Related Lessons:
B-01 Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature. 
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-02 Define environmental variables in observable and measurable terms.
FK-07 Environmental (as opposed to mentalistic) explanations of behavior

Notes: