J-02 IDENTIFY POTENTIAL INTERVENIONS BASED ON ASSESSMENT RESULTS AND THE BEST AVAILABLE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE.

“Interventions should be functionally equivalent to problem behavior” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 513). In other words, the intervention should serve as a more appropriate way of accessing a specific function than the interfering behavior. “One effective way to design interventions is to review confirmed hypotheses to determine how the ABC contingency can be altered to promote more positive behavior” (Cooper, et al., 2007, p. 513).  In other words if you can change the antecedents or consequences associated with a problem behavior, you may be able to decrease occurrences of that behavior. 
Wolf (1978) recommended that interventions should be assessed based on appropriateness and the potential social significance of the outcomes. Specific social validity assessments can be conducted “to help choose and guide (behavior change) program developments and applications” (Baer & Schwartz, 1991, p. 231).
Results of an FBA can help determine which interventions would not be appropriate to decrease the target behavior. Once assessments are completed, monitor the progress of the interventions put in place and conduct follow up assessments regularly. Any intervention program should be based on techniques found in behavior analytic literature. This ensures that the intervention is a proven technology and has stood up to experimental manipulation and decreased or increased similar types of behavior.
In regard to assessments that are not based on the function of the behavior, (i.e., adaptive assessments, verbal behavior assessments, cognitive assessments) a profile of strengths and weaknesses as well as standard scores and rankings are typically provided once the assessment is completed. The areas that present as weaknesses should typically be addressed first based on their social significance to the client. Once these areas have been identified, appropriate interventions can be put into place to build the client’s missing repertoires and skill base. 
 
Example: 
George completed an FBA on Sam’s instances of aggression in the classroom. The hypothesized function for this behavior was escape from demands. George created an intervention plan that would allow Sam to functionally ask for breaks to briefly escape work demands. 

Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor: 















Relevant Literature: 
Baer, D.M. & Schwartz, I.S. (1991). If reliance on epidemiology were to become epidemic, we would need to assess its social validity. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24, 321-334.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 55-65, 237-240, 513-523, 623-624.
Gresham, F., Watson, T.S., & Skinner, C.H. (2001). Functional Behavioral Assessment: Principals, Procedures, and Future Directions. School Psychology Review, 30, 2, 156-172.
Lerman, D.C., Iwata, B.A., Smith, R.G., Zincone, J.R., & Vollmer, T.R. (1994). Transfer of behavioral function as a contributing factor in treatment relapse. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 357-370.

Related Lessons:
E-01: Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations & discriminative stimuli.
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-02: Define environmental variables in observable and measurable terms.
I-04: Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.
I-06: Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased. 
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.
J-10: When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.

Notes: