J-05 select intervention strategies based on client’s current repertoires.

The importance of considering the client’s current repertoires
Basing intervention strategies on the client’s current repertoires is a key foundation of what behavior analysts do. It is imperative that prior to implementing any type of intervention or strategy with a client, the behavior analyst is extremely clear about what the client already does and can therefore, consider possible intervention strategies. Noell, Call, and Ardoin (2011) state that “one of the considerable challenges in teaching arises from identifying not only the behaviors that are prerequisites for the target response, but also the level of skill proficiency needed to set the occasion for teaching the target skill” (Noell, Call, & Ardoin, 2011, cited from Fisher, Piazza, & Roane, 2011, p. 251).

The importance of accurate assessments
In order to assess a client’s current repertoires, it is imperative that these repertoires are properly assessed. For example, assessments to evaluate the presence of a particular skill or repertoire should take place in a variety of different environments, with many different examples of stimuli, with the antecedent presented in a variety of different ways, and with many different people presenting the skill. Novel examples of the skill should also be tested. Noell et al. (2011) emphasize this point by suggesting that “assessment of behavior under varied conditions in a manner that tests consequences should be an element of any pre-teaching assessment” (Noell, Call & Ardoin, 2011, cited from Fisher, Piazza & Roane, 2011, p. 255). 

Once assessments of the client’s current repertoires are complete
Once the assessment stage is complete, it is then appropriate to select possible intervention strategies. As Noell et al. (2011) propose it is important at this point that behavior analysts “keep the long-term view in mind” (Noell, Call & Ardoin, 2011, cited from Fisher, Piazza &Roane, 2011, p. 266).  We should be attempting to “not bring individual operants under stimulus control” but instead “help clients and students develop the complex, flexible repertoires that are adaptive, that remain in contact with reinforcement, and that confer adaptive advantage and endure” (Noell, Call & Ardoin, 2011, cf. Fisher, Piazza & Roane, 2011, p. 266).



Write another example:











Questions to ask your supervisor:










Relevant Literature: 
Fisher, W. W., Piazza, C. C., & Roane, H. S. (Eds.). (2011). Handbook of applied behavior analysis. Guilford Press.
Noell, G. H., Call, N. A. & Ardoin, S. P. (2011). Building complex repertoires from discrete behaviors by establishing stimulus control, behavioral chains, and strategic behavior. 
Shapiro, E. S. (1996). Academic skills problems: Direct assessment and intervention (2nd ed.). New York: Guildford Press.

Related Lessons:
D-09: Use the verbal operants as a basis for language assessment.
G-03: Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
I-03: Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
J-03: Select intervention strategies based on task analysis.
I-04: Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
J-06: Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments
J-07: Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention

Notes: