J-06 SELECT INTERVENTION STRATEGIES BASED ON SUPPORTING ENVIRONMENTS.

“Achieving optimal generalized outcomes requires thoughtful, systematic planning. This planning begins with two major steps: (1) selecting target behaviors that will meet natural contingencies of reinforcement, and (2) specifying all desired variations of the target behavior and the settings/situations in which it should (and should not) occur after instruction has ended” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 623). In other words, an intervention must be selected that will allow the client to access reinforcement in a specific environment. If that is not possible, then alternative interventions should be explored. 

Ayllon and Azrin (1968) state that an important rule of thumb is to choose interventions that will help produce reinforcement after the intervention is discontinued. The intervention should support the student until they can access naturally existing contingencies (i.e., verbal praise from a teacher) and then more intensive, contrived contingencies should be systematically faded. The goal of most intervention programs is to teach a skill and then fade support so the client can implement that skill across settings. 

Cooper, Heron, & Heward (2007, p. 626) identify 5 strategic approaches to promote generalized behavior change.
1. Teach the full range of relevant stimulus conditions and response requirements (i.e., teaching sufficient stimulus and response examples based on the setting)
2. Make the instructional setting similar to the generalization setting. (i.e., program common stimuli and teach loosely)
3. Maximize the target behavior’s contact with reinforcement in the generalization setting. (i.e., ask people in the generalization setting to reinforce the target behavior, teach the learner to recruit reinforcement, and teach the target behavior to levels of performance required by natural existing contingencies of reinforcement.)
4. Mediate generalization. (i.e., teach self-management skills and contrive a mediating stimulus)
5. Train to generalize. (i.e., reinforce response variability and instruct the learner to generalize)

Example: 
George set up a token economy for Bill that systematically increased the number of responses needed to earn a token. After some time, Bill was earning tokens for completing an entire worksheet rather than earning a token for each question answered. This allowed Bill to independently complete worksheets in his general education classroom without a paraprofessional by his side giving him tokens after each answer. 

Write another example:







Questions to ask your supervisor: 




















Relevant Literature: 
Ayllon, T., & Azrin, N.H. (1968). The token economy: A motivational system for therapy and rehabilitation. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Baer, D.M. (1999). How to plan for generalization (2nd ed.). Austin, TX.: Pro-Ed.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 55-65, 623-624, 652.
Snell, M.E., & Brown. F. (2006). Instruction of students with severe disabilities (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Stokes, T.F., & Baer, D.M. (1977). An implicit technology of generalization. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 349-367.
Stokes, T.F., & Osnes, P.G. (1989). An operant pursuit of generalization. Behavior Therapy, 20, 337-355.

Related Lessons:
G-08: Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services. 
J-07: Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-11: Program for stimulus and response generalization
J-12: Program for maintenance.
K-07: Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.

Notes:
