J-07 select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource contraints.

Definition:
“The independent variable should be evaluated not only in terms of its effects on the dependent variable, but also in terms of its social acceptability, complexity, practicality, and cost” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).

One method for determining the feasibility of an intervention is by asking consumers (parents, teachers, administrators) to rate the social validity of the client’s performance. Questions that are typically posed to consumers before interventions are implemented include asking the consumer how reasonable they feel the intervention is, asking the consumer’s willingness to implement the intervention strategies, asking if the consumer would be willing to change the environment to implement the intervention, asking how disruptive the intervention may be to the natural environment, asking how costly it would be to implement the intervention, asking if there will be any discomfort in the client when implementing these procedures, and asking if carrying out the intervention will fit with the classroom or setting routines (Reimers & Wacker, 1988 cited from Cooper et al., 2007)

Example:
Rob has decided to implement a reinforcement program based on appropriate responses rather than a fixed time DRO program. He understands that there is no paraprofessional in the classroom to help run the program and the teacher has other educational duties so she cannot run a timer and deliver reinforcement consistently enough for a rigorous DRO. 


Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor:







Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 240 (Figure 10.5), 250, 652, 674-676.
Hawkins, R.P. (1984). What is “meaningful” behavior change in a severely/ profoundly retarded learner: The view of a behavior analytic parent. In W.L. Heward, T.E. Heron, D.S. Hill, & J. Trap-Porter (Eds.), Focus on behavior analysis in education (pp. 282-286). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall/Merrill. 
Reimers, T.M., & Wacker, D.P. (1988). Parent’s ratings of the acceptability of behavior treatment recommendations made in an outpatient clinic: A preliminary analysis of the influence of treatment effectiveness. Behavioral Disorders, 14, 7-15.
Wolf, M.M. (1978). Social Validity: The case for subjective measurement or how applied behavior analysis is finding its heart. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 203-214.

Related Lessons:
C-01: State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of reinforcement.
G-06: Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients. 
G-08: Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services. 
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measureable terms.
1-02: Define environmental variables in observable and measureable terms.
J-06: Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
K-07: Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments. 
FK-11: Environment, stimulus, stimulus class.

Notes: