J-08 select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.

A distinguishing characteristic of applied behavior analysis is assessing an individual’s functioning within the context of natural environments. This applied aspect focuses the behavior analyst on identifying meaningful goals and acceptable methods for intervention that will increase the individual’s independence and level of functioning in natural settings. The behavior analyst sets intervention goals that comply with stated preferences of the individual client, goals of those who live and work with the individual, and consider how typical individuals function in similar environments. Analysts seek goals that are socially valid and intervention methods that are not only scientifically validated strategies for accomplishing those goals, but strategies that can be expected to be implemented consistently and with fidelity by those who will apply the strategies. Although an intervention might be effective in a clinical, controlled setting, the behavior analyst must consider intervention limitations related to “social acceptability, complexity, practicality, and cost. Regardless of their effectiveness, treatments that are perceived by practitioners, parents, and/or clients as unacceptable or undesirable for whatever reason are unlikely to be used” (Cooper et al, 2007, p. 250).

Examples:
A child hits her six month-old sister even when their parents model and reinforce appropriate behaviors toward the baby. The parents find it difficult to avoid explaining to the child, at the same time that they block her physically, reasons her behaviors are unkind and even dangerous. The behavior analyst talks to the parents about how the parent’s explanations might be reinforcing the big sister aggression. The parents and the analyst increase the opportunities they have to individually attend to the child during appropriate play throughout the day. The parents ask the analyst to help them design a structured plan to teach appropriate sibling behaviors through language, modeling, literature, role play, movies, and increased reinforcement for appropriate behaviors of the sister toward her younger sibling.
A man hits his head and pulls at his ears with such force that he has required emergency medical care. At the beginning of treatment, the behavior analyst recommends that the man be given access to a helmet to prevent significant injury when he is not adequately staffed to stop his behavior. His family is against the man appearing in public with a protective helmet. The behavior analyst explains the reasons such equipment might be important for protecting the man from harm when his 1:1 staff person is distracted by driving a car or interacting with clerks or others in the community. The analyst and the family agree that until interventions stops the severe self-injury, the man will participate in community activities with a helmet unless a family member accompanies staff in the community with him. 





Write another example: 












Questions to ask your supervisor:











Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Fawcett, S. B. (1991). Social validity: A note on methodology. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24(2), 235-239.
Wolf, M. M. (1978). Social validity: The case for subjective measurement or how applied behavior analysis is finding its heart. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 11(2), 203-214.

Related Lessons:
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients
G-08 Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-04 Select intervention strategies based on client preferences.
J-05 Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-12 Program for maintenance.
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly.
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-09 Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.

Notes: