G-07 practice within one’s limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, and training, or make referrals as necessary.

Behavior analysts follow guidelines related to boundaries of competence in 1.02 of the Behavior Analyst Certification Board professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts:

1.02 Boundaries of Competence.
(a) All behavior analysts provide services, teach, and conduct research only within the boundaries of their competence, defined as being commensurate with their education, training, and supervised experience. 
(b) Behavior analysts provide services, teach, or conduct research in new areas (e.g., populations, techniques, behaviors) only after first undertaking appropriate study, training, supervision, and/or consultation from persons who are competent in those areas… (BACB, 2014, p.4).

Practicing within your area of competence, training and experience
If, for example, a senior therapist working within an intensive behavior intervention program for preschoolers suddenly began working with adults with phobias then they would be in violation of this ethical guideline. Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007) go on further to say that even within one's competence area, if a situation exceeds your training or experience then a referral to another behavior analyst should be made. If there is a gap in expertise, available then workshops and conferences may be accessed.  Mentors, supervisors and colleagues can provide additional training.  

Bailey and Burch (2011) relate this ethical boundary to the Hippocratic Oath, "Do no harm".  The guideline addresses the responsible conduct of behavior analysts, ensures the safety of clients, and protects the integrity of the field.

Write an example:




















Questions to ask your supervisor:































Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts: 2nd Expanded Edition. Taylor & Francis.
Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) Behavior Analyst Certification Board professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts. 2014. Retrieved from www.bacb.com/Downloadfiles/BACB_Compliance_Code.pdf.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson Education, Inc.
Houten, R., Axelrod, S., Bailey, J. S., Favell, J. E., Foxx, R. M., Iwata, B. A., & Lovaas, O. I. (1988).  The right to effective behavioral treatment.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 21(4), 381-384.

Related Lessons:
B-02: Review and interpret articles from the behavior analytic literature.
G-02: Consider biological/medical variables that may be affecting the client.
G-06: Provide behavior analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
K-08: Establish support for behavior analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environment.

Notes: