K-09 secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.

Foxx (1996, p. 230) stated that in programming successful behavior change interventions, “10% is knowing what to do; 90% is getting people to do it…Many programs are unsuccessful because these percentages have been reversed.” (Cooper et al., 2007, p. 652). 
Being explicit yet simplistic in describing programs and protocols will help secure support from other individuals in a client’s environment. If a behavior change procedure or program is too difficult, technical, or places unreasonable demands on the other individuals involved, they are less likely to implement these programs. In addition, adequate training of behavior procedures should be provided to ensure proper implementation by those interacting with the client in the natural environment. Specifically, training pertaining to the delivery of reinforcers, which maintain the individual’s newly acquired behavioral repertoires.
Jarmolowicz et al. (2008) compared the effectiveness of conversational language instructions and technical language instructions when explaining how to implement a treatment to caregivers. They found that the caregivers that were given conversational language instruction implemented the treatment more accurately.

Example: 
Richard is trying to generalize skills learned in the special education classroom for one of his students. He went to each teacher to explain how this will help the student in their class and answered any questions they may have about the programs. In addition, he conducted a training on the specific program and offered to consult with each teacher in order to make sure generalization was successful and the repertoire was maintained.

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:






















Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 641-642, 652.
David P. Jarmolowicz, SungWoo Kahng, Einar T. Ingvarsson, Richard Goysovich, Rebecca Heggemeyer, Meagan K. Gregory, and Steven J. Taylor (2008) Effects of Conversational Versus Technical Language on Treatment Preference and Integrity. Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities: June 2008, Vol. 46, No. 3, pp. 190-199.
Stokes, T.F., Baer, D.M., & Jackson, R.L. (1974). Programming the generalization of a greeting response in four retarded children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 7, 599-610.

Related Lessons:
H-01: Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
K-03: Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-04: Design and use effective performance monitoring and reinforcement systems.
K-06: Provide supervision for behavior-change agents.
K-08: Establish support for behavior-analytic services from direct and indirect consumers

Notes: