E-06 use stimulus equivalence procedures.
Definition: 
In the field of applied behavior analysis, a number of procedures have been used to teach new concepts.  One of these procedures is known as stimulus equivalence.  In 1971, Murray Sidman discovered that a previously untaught, unreinforced stimuli could come under stimulus control through its pairing with other stimuli which were explicitly taught (Sidman, 1971). This concept revolutionized the field as it demonstrated a new way of teaching that could potentially reduce the amount of time needed to teach a new class of stimuli.   “Behavior analysts define stimulus equivalence by testing stimulus-stimulus relations.  A positive demonstration of all three behavioral tests (i.e. reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity) is necessary to meet the definition of an equivalence relation among a set of arbitrary stimuli.” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Reflexivity describes the action of selecting a stimulus that is matched to itself in the absence of training and reinforcement (A=A).  For instance an individual is shown three pictures; a penny, a nickel, and a dime.  When given an identical picture of a penny, he matches it to the identical picture of a penny in the array (Sidman, 1994).
Symmetry describes the reversibility of the sample stimulus and a comparison stimulus (A=B and B=A).  For instance an individual who is taught to select the picture of a penny (out of an array of 3), when the word penny is given, would also be able to choose the comparison spoken word penny shown the picture of the penny without being previously taught this correlation (Sidman, 1994).  
Transitivity is the most crucial test for demonstrating stimulus equivalence.  A third, untrained relation emerges as a result of being taught the first two relations.  (A=C and C=A) “is a product of training the other two stimulus-stimulus relations” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  

Example: 
The following equation demonstrates the basic principles of stimulus equivalence:  

If A = B, and B = C, then A = C. (Sidman & Tailby, 1982)

When using stimulus equivalence, decide what relations are to be taught (i.e. spoken word to picture, picture to written word, drawing to real-life picture, etc.).  Decide which order the conditional relations are to be taught.  Teach the relations A=B and B=C to mastery criteria.  Once mastery criteria are met for the first two relations, test for reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity using the same criteria.  If the participant demonstrates these relations without having been previously been taught them, they will have acquired the third relation C=A that demonstrates the most important test for stimulus equivalence.

Write another example:





















































Questions to ask your supervisor:





































































Relevant Literature: 
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Sidman, M. (1971) Reading and auditory-visual equivalences. Journal of Speech & Hearing Research, Volume 14(1), 5-13. 
Sidman, M. (1994).  Equivalence Relations and Behavior: A Research Story.  Boston:  Author’s Cooperative.  
Sidman, M. and Tailby, W. (1982).  Conditional Discrimination Vs. Matching to Sample: An Expansion of the Testing Paradigm.  Journal of Experimental Analysis Behavior, 37: 5–22.

Related Lessons: 
E-06 Use stimulus equivalence procedures.
E-13 Use matching-to-sample procedures.
FK-11 environment, stimulus, stimulus class 
FK-12 stimulus equivalence 
FK-13 reflexive relations (US-UR)
FK-24 stimulus control
FK-28 transitive, reflexive, surrogate motivating operations
FK-35 stimulus discrimination

Notes: