E-12 use errorless learning procedures.
Definition:
Errorless learning - an “approach whereby the task is manipulated to eliminate/reduce errors. Tasks are executed in such a way that the subject is unlikely to make errors” (Fillingham, Hodgson, Sage, & Ralph, 2003, p. 339). 

Errorless learning techniques include most-to-least prompt fading or stimulus shaping/fading techniques. Prompts are removed gradually as the individual becomes more adept with the skill, thereby reducing the likelihood of errors.  To apply errorless learning, behavioral strategies utilized may include: response prevention (e.g., only S+ is presented allowing for only correct responding or physical guidance is provided with instruction so incorrect responses are not possible); verbal prompt fading; modeling; stimulus fading (e.g. emphasizing a physical dimension of the stimuli to evoke a correct response such as by illuminating the correct selection, S+, and presenting the incorrect selection, S-, in a dimmer format); or stimulus shaping (e.g. increasing likelihood of correct responding by gradually changing the shape of the stimulus to maintain correct responding). 

The advantages of errorless learning include that it removes negative side effects involved with trial-and-error learning and that it is proven particularly effective among individuals that suffer from brain damage or have a developmental disorder. The disadvantages include cost, time-intensity, and maybe considered less natural than trial-and-error learning (Mueller, Palkovic & Maynard, 2007).

Example: 
Trial-and-error learning, being presented with stimuli in which both the correct selection (S+) and incorrect selection (S-) are available, can lead to adverse side effects due to the possibility of incorrect responding and failure to access reinforcers. Research has shown that this can result in aggression, negative emotional responses and stimulus overselectivity (Mueller et al., 2007).

Write another example:
















Questions to ask your supervisor:


























Relevant Literature:
Fillingham, J.K,, Hodgson, C., Sage, K., & Ralph, M.A. (2003). The application of errorless learning to aphasic disorders: A review of theory and practice. Neuropsychological Rehabiliation, 13(3), 337-363. 
Mueller, M.M., Palkovic, C.M., & Maynard, C.S. (2007). Errorless learning: review and practical application for teaching children with pervasive developmental disorders. Psychology in the Schools, 44(7), 691-700.
Terrace, H.S. (1963). Discrimination learning with and without “errors”. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 6(1), 1-27. 

Related Lessons: 
D-03 Use prompts and prompt fading
D-04 Use modeling and imitation training
FK-24 Stimulus control
Notes: