E-13 USE MATCHING-TO-SAMPLE PROCEDURES.

Definition: 
Matching-to-sample - “A procedure for investigating conditional relations and stimulus equivalence. A matching-to-sample trial begins with the participant making a response that presents or reveals the sample stimulus; next, the sample stimulus may or may not be removed, and two or more comparison stimuli are presented. The participant then selects one the comparison stimuli. Responses that select a comparison stimulus that matches the sample stimulus are reinforced, and no reinforcement is provided for responses selecting the nonmatching comparison stimuli” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 699).

Example: 
A teacher presents a student with a picture of an apple. The teacher then lays out three other picture cards away from the original picture of an apple. One picture card depicts an apple, the second picture card depicts a banana, and the final picture card depicts an orange. The teacher holds up the initial picture card depicting an apple and states, “match”.  The student takes the picture of an apple and places it on top of the corresponding picture of an apple. The teacher says, “Great job” and gives the student a high five.
Write another example:














Questions to ask your supervisor:













Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 398-401.
Cumming, W.W. & Berryman, R. (1965). The complex discriminated operant: Studies of matching-to-sample and related problems. In D.I. Mostofsky (Ed.), Stimulus Generalization (pp. 284-333). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Fields, L., Garrutto, M., & Watanabe, M. (2010). Varieties of stimulus control in matching-to-sample: A kernel analysis. The Psychological Record, 60, 3-26.
Sidman, M., Wilson-Morris, M., & Kirk, B. (1986). Matching-to-sample procedures and the development of equivalence relations: The role of naming. Analysis and Interventions in Developmental Disabilities, 6, 1, 1-19.

Related Lessons:
D-03: Use prompts and prompt fading.
D-08: Use discrete-trials and free-operant arrangements.
E-02: Use discrimination training procedures.
E-06: Use stimulus equivalence procedures.
E-12: Use errorless learning procedures.

Notes:
