FK-12 STIMULUS EQUIVALENCE.

Definition (Stimulus Equivalence): 







 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Reflexivity): 








 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Symmetry): 








 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Transitivity): 









 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency
Examples:
When learner responds without prior reinforcement and training that A=A (exhibiting reflexivity) and if A=B, then B must also = A (exhibiting symmetry) and finally that if A=B and B=C, then C must also equal A (exhibiting transitivity). 
Reflexivity: Without prior reinforcement or training, when shown a picture of a dog and given a picture of the same dog, a rat, and a cow, student matches the picture of the two dogs (e.g. A=A).

Symmetry: Student is taught that when given the written word dog to select the picture of a dog. Without further reinforcement or training, when given the picture of the dog, student selects the written word dog (e.g. If A=B, then B=A).

Transitivity: Student is taught that when given the written word dog to select the picture of the dog (e.g. A=B). Student is also taught to select the picture of the dog when hearing the spoken word dog (e.g. B=C). Without further reinforcement or training, student selects the written word dog after hearing the spoken word dog (e.g. C=A).

Non-Examples:
When learner responds without prior reinforcement and training that A=A (exhibiting reflexivity) and if A=B, then B must also equal A (exhibiting symmetry) but cannot show that if A=B and B=C, then C must also equal A (failure to exhibit transitivity). 

Write another example:


















Questions to ask your supervisor:





































Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sidman, M. (1997). Equivalence relations. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 68(2), 258-266.

Notes:
Sidman, M. (2009). Equivalence relations and behavior: An introductory tutorial. The Analysis of verbal behavior, 25(1), 5.

Related Lessons: 
E-06 Use Stimulus equivalence procedures
E-13 Use matching-to-sample procedures
