D-19 USE COMBINATIONS OF REINFORCEMENT WITH PUNISHMENT AND EXTINCTION.

Definition: 
A guideline for using extinction effectively is the simultaneous use of reinforcement procedures. Extinction used alone may result in a temporary increase in the target behavior known as extinction burst (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). Teaching an alternative behavior may decrease the extinction burst effects and other possible side effects such as aggressive behavior (Lerman, Iwata, & Wallace, 1999). Similarly, several studies have found that differential reinforcement procedures are most effective when used in conjunction with extinction (e.g., Fisher, Piazza, Cataldo, Harrell, Jefferson, & Conner, 1993; Hagopian, Fisher, Sullivan, Acquisto, & LeBlanc, 1998; Piazza, Patel, Gulotta, Sevin, & Layer, 2002).  Using extinction with differential reinforcement ensures that concurrent access to reinforcement for inappropriate behavior is not favored, thereby increasing the likelihood of allocation to the alternative behavior targeted for increase.

Likewise, punishment procedures are most effective when used in conjunction with reinforcement-based procedures (Millenson, 1967).  The main rationale for use of reinforcement with punishment procedures is that punishment is considered an intrusive treatment procedure. In addition, punishment procedures do not teach the individual any appropriate skills. Teaching appropriate skills helps to solve these problems. Reinforcing an alternative behavior makes it more likely that punishment procedures can then be faded out as the appropriate behavior replaces the inappropriate behavior. A study conducted by Holz, Azrin and Ayllon (1963) even found that punishment was ineffective without the use of reinforcement contingencies.  Several studies have illustrated the benefits of using reinforcement in conjunction with punishment procedures (e.g., Fisher et al., 1993; Hagopian et al., 1998; Thompson, Iwata, Conners, & Roscoe, 1999).  

Example: 
George created a new reinforcement program for one of his students, but it was not helping to decrease the behavior. George decided to implement a response cost procedure in conjunction with the reinforcement to strengthen the current reinforcer. His student could earn up to 10 minutes on the IPad at the end of the day for engaging in appropriate classroom behavior. For every target interfering behavior such as verbal protest or noncompliance, a minute was taken off of that reinforcement break duration. This helped to increase appropriate behavior and decrease inappropriate classroom behavior at school.

Write another example: 



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Fisher, W., Piazza, C., Cataldo, M., Harrell, R., Jefferson, G., & Conner, R. (1993). Functional communication training with and without extinction and punishment. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26(1), 23–36.
Hagopian, L. P., Fisher, W. W., Sullivan, M. T., Acquisto, J., & LeBlanc, L. A. (1998). Effectiveness of functional communication training with and without extinction and punishment: A summary of 21 inpatient cases. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31(2), 211-235. 
Holz, W. C., Azrin, N. H., & Ayllon, T. (1963). Elimination of behavior of mental patients by response-produced extinction. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 6(3), 407.
Lerman, D. C., Iwata, B. A., & Wallace, M. D. (1999). Side effects of extinction: prevalence of bursting and aggression during the treatment of self-injurious behavior. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 32(1), 1-8.
Millenson, J. R., & Leslie, J. C. (1967). Principles of behavioral analysis (pp. 43-44). New York: Macmillan.
Piazza, C. C., Patel, M. R., Gulotta, C. S., Sevin, B. M., & Layer, S. A. (2002). On the relative contributions of positive reinforcement and escape extinction in the treatment of food refusal. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 36(3), 309-324.
Thompson, R. H., Iwata, B. A., Conners, J., & Roscoe, E. M. (1999). Effects of reinforcement for alternative behavior during punishment of self-injury. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 32(3), 317.

Related Lessons: 
B-10 Conduct a component analysis to determine the effective components of an intervention package.
C-01 State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of reinforcement. 
C-02 State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of punishment. 
C-03 State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of extinction.
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement. 
D-02 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
D-15 Identify punishers. 
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment. 
D-17 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment. 
D-18 Use extinction.
D-20 Use response-independent (time-based) schedules of reinforcement (i.e., noncontingent reinforcement). 
D-21 Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH).
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased. 
I-07 Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers.
J-02 Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.

Notes:
