E-07 Plan for behavioral contrast effects.
Definition: 
George Reynolds first presented behavioral contrast in 1961. He defined behavioral contrast as “an increase in the rate of responding in one component of a multiple schedule when certain changes occur in the other component” (p. 60). 
Cooper, Heron and Heward state that behavioral contrast “can occur as a function of a change in reinforcement or punishment density on one component of a multiple schedule” (p. 337).
It is important to consider prior to beginning an intervention, whether behavioral contrast may occur as a result of that planned intervention. If behavioral contrast is a possibility; then planning for its occurrence is crucial.
Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007, p. 338) suggest that one way to minimize or completely prevent the contrast effects of punishment is to plan the intervention so that the consequence is consistently applied to the target behavior across all relevant environments and stimulus conditions. All those involved in the client’s life that may be required to deliver the consequence, will need to be thoroughly trained to ensure its consistent implementation.
Additionally, reinforcement will need to be minimized, or where possible, withheld, when the target behavior has occurred. Similarly, training will need to be provided to all those involved so that the client isn’t receiving reinforcement when the target behavior is emitted.

Example: 
A pigeon pecks a backlit key, which alternates between blue and green. Reinforcement is delivered on the same schedule on both keys, and the bird pecks at approximately the same rate regardless of the key’s color. However, this changes so that responses on one component of the schedule are punished, i.e., pecks on the blue key are punished because reinforcement is not delivered, but pecks on the other (green) key continue to produce reinforcement. As a result, rate of responding decreases on the blue key and rate of responding on the green key increases, even though no more reinforcement is delivered from the green key than before. (Cooper, Heron, Heward, 2007).

Write another example:

















Questions to ask your supervisor:











Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. 
Fagan, J. W. (1978). Behavioral contrast in infants. Infant behavior and development, 2, 101-112.
Hantula, D. A., & Crowell, C. R. (1994). Behavioral contrast in a two-option analogue task of financial decision making. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 607-617.
McSweeney, F. K., & Weatherly, J. N. (1998). Habituation to the reinforcer may contribute to multiple-schedule behavioral contrast. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 69, 199-221.
Reynolds, G. S. (1961a). Behavioral contrast. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4, 57 – 71.
Reynolds, G. S. (1963). Some limitations on behavioral contrast and induction during successive discrimination. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 6, 131-139.
Tarbox, J., & Parrott Hayes, L. (2005). Verbal behavior and behavioral contrast in human subjects. The Psychological Record, 55, 419-437.
Weatherly, J. N., Melville, C. L., & McSweeney, F. K. (1996). Picking, pecking, and pressing: A cross-species demonstration of behavioral contrast. The Psychological Record, 46, 351-372.
Weatherly, J. N., King, B. M., Arthur, E. I. L. (2002). Rats’ level pressing for 1% sucrose and food-pellet reinforcement: In search of negative behavioral contrast. The Psychological Record, 52, 507-529.

Related Lessons:
C-02: State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of punishment
D-15: Identify punishers
D-16: Use positive and negative punishment
D-17: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment
D19: Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction
J-10: When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
K-02: Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly
FK-38: Behavioral contrast
FK-40: Matching law

Notes: