E-09 arrange high probability request sequences.

Definitions:
Using a high-probability (high-p) request sequence involves presenting a series of requests that the individual has a history of following before presenting a target request (low-p).  The following is recommended in order to maximize the effectiveness of the high-p request sequence: (1) tasks/requests should already be in the learner’s repertoire (i.e., the skill is considered mastered); (2) high-p requests should be presented rapidly; (3) the first low-p request should be presented immediately after reinforcement for high-p compliance; and (4) and salient reinforcers should be used for low-p requests (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  It is also recommended to avoid using low-difficulty tasks immediately after a maladaptive behavior that was triggered by a high-difficulty task (Sailors, Guess, Rutherford, & Baer, 1968).  In the initial stages of acquisition of a low-p request, increasing the number of high-p requests increases the effectiveness of the high-p request sequence (Mace, 1996).  High-p request sequences are helpful in reducing the reinforcing value of escape from requests and the maladaptive behaviors that often occur when low-p requests are presented.  The high-p request sequence is synonymous with interspersal training and behavioral momentum (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  



Example:
Brett is starting to become noncompliant and swiping materials off of his desk. To get him back on track, the teacher starts presenting trials of letter identification. This is an easy task for Brett and one he has mastered. After ten trials, the teacher presents the previous demand and Brett begins working again without interfering behaviors.

Write another example:















Questions to ask your supervisor:













Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Antecedent interventions. Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.). (pp. 486-499). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Davis, C. A., & Reichle, J. (1996). Variant and invariant high-probability requests: Increasing appropriate behaviors in children with emotional-behavioral disorders. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 471-482.
Mace, F. C. (1996). In pursuit of general behavioral relations. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 557-514.
Sailor, W., Guess, D., Rutherford, G., & Baer, D. M. (1968). Control of tantrum behavior by operant techniques during experimental verbal training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1(3), 237-243.

Related Lessons:
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement.
D-02 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli. 
E-10 Use the Premack principle.

Notes: