E-10 use the premack principle

Definitions:
“The Premack principle is a principle of reinforcement which states that an opportunity to engage in more probable behaviors (or activities) will reinforce less probable behaviors (or activities). For example, if a child often plays computer games (more probable) and avoids completing math problems (less probable), we might allow her to play the computer after (contingent upon) completing 15 math problems. Prior to the introduction of the Premack principle, systems of reinforcement were viewed as the contingency between a stimulus and behavior. The Premack principle expanded the existing reinforcement contingency of stimulus behavior to include contingencies between two behaviors. This principle is often referred to as “grandma’s rule” because grandmothers (or any caregivers) often apply this principle: “you have to eat your vegetables (less probable) before you can have dessert (more probable).” (Barton, 2013)
In education, the Premack principle is the basis for “first/then” strategies. “First/then” strategies consist of a teacher telling a student “First X, then Y” with X being a less preferred activity or task demand and Y being a more preferred activity contingent on the completion of X.
This principle uses preferred activities as reinforcers to help increase engagement in less preferred activities or demands. 

Example:
A father tells his teenage son, “When you have finished washing the dishes, you can watch TV.”

Write another example:





















Questions to ask your supervisor: 



















Relevant Literature: 
Azrin, N. H., Vinas, V., & Ehle, C. T. (2007). Physical activity as reinforcement for classroom calmness of ADHD children: A preliminary study. Child & Family Behavior Therapy, 29, 2, 1-8.
Barton, E.E. (2013). Premack’s Principle. In Encyclopedia of Autism Spectrum Disorders. Volkmar, F.R. (Ed.) (p. 2345) Springer New York: New York, NY.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 271-273, 277.
Mazur, J.E. (1975). The Matching Law and Quantifications Related to Premack’s Principle. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 1, 4, 374-386.
Sigafoos, J. (2005). From Premack to PECS: 25 Years of Progress in Communication Intervention for Individuals with Developmental Disabilities. Educational Psychology, 25, 6, 601-607.
Welsh, D.H., Bernstein, D.J., & Luthans, F. (1992). Application of the Premack Principle of Reinforcement to the Quality Performance of Service Employees. Journal of Organizational Behavior Management, 13, 1, 9.

Related Lessons:
D-01: Use positive and negative reinforcement
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement. 
I-07: Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers. 
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.

Notes: