C – 01 STATE AND PLAN FOR THE POSSIBLE UNWANTED EFFECTS OF REINFORCEMENT.

Definition (Positive Reinforcement): 



(Cooper, Heron, Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Reinforcement has been long been defined as a crucial element to behavioral change. However, there are considerations that behavioral analysts should explore before implementing reinforcement strategies. 

Considerations for the use of positive reinforcement: 
May suppress the desired response 
May not be feasible for an individual that has little or no learning history with that reinforcement contingency.
Increases the frequency of the target behavior, thereby reducing the frequency in other responses that may also be desirable 
May evoke aggression in others, especially in conditions which there are limited quantities of the reinforcer.
May also evoke aggression when group contingencies are used.
Removal of positive reinforcer has been correlated with lower than baseline levels of responding (Balsam & Bondy, 1983).

Definition (Negative Reinforcement): 



 (Cooper, Heron, Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Considerations for the use of negative reinforcement: 
Can result in more challenging behavior due to the continuation of aversive stimulation if target behavior is not displayed 
Research shows that even for escape-maintained behavior, positive reinforcement contingencies may compete with negative reinforcement contingencies, therefore, decreasing escape-maintained behavior (Lerman, Volkert & Trosclair, 2007). 
Negative reinforcement contingencies may reinforce minimal requirements needed to avoid/escape aversive stimulus; does not focus on quality of target response (Balsam & Bondy, 1983).
Requires continuous aversive stimulation and aversive stimulation often elicits aggressive responses.

These unwanted effects of reinforcement can be curbed taking baseline levels of the target behavior before setting criteria for reinforcement, implementing preference assessments routinely, ensuring reinforcement schedule and reinforcers chosen are as natural to the individual’s environment as possible to promote generalization, systematic thinning of the reinforcement schedule, and having concurrent schedules of reinforcement for positive and negative reinforcement when negative reinforcement is utilized.

Example: 
The availability of the reinforcer elicits behavior that may compete with the target response (Balsam & Bondy, 1983). 
An individual that is being taught to swallow solid food may not progress with a program solely using positive reinforcement due to low baseline levels of swallowing solid foods (Riordan, Iwata, Wohl & Finney, 1984).  
While teaching a student to raise their hand and wait until they are called on in class, the student no longer garners others’ attention by calling their name (Balsam & Bondy, 1983). 
Aggression may be directed at individuals that are also competing for same reinforce 
performing teammates 
Removal of positive reinforcer has been correlated with lower than baseline levels of responding (Balsam & Bondy, 1983).
A child that engages in aggression to escape tasks may be more likely complete tasks without aggression if access to an iPad was given contingent on work completion. This may be more effective than reducing aggression by providing breaks contingent on appropriate asking.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor: 



Relevant Literature: 
Balsam, P.D., & Bondy, A.S. (1983). The negative side effects of reward. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 16(3), 283-296. 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Flora, S.R. (2004). The power of reinforcement. Albany: State University of New York Press.  
Lerman, D.C., Volkert, V.M., & Trosclair, N. (2007). Further examination of factors that influence preference for positive versus negative reinforcement. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 40(1), 25-44. 
Riordan M.M., Iwata B.A., Wohl M.K., Finney J.W. (1984). Behavioral treatment of food refusal and selectivity in developmentally disabled children. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis. 17(3), 327-341. 

Related Lessons: 
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement.
D-02 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement. 
D-21 Use differential reinforcement (e.g. DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH).
E-11 Use pairing procedures to establish new conditioned reinforcers and punishers. 
I-07 Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers.
J-04 Select intervention strategies based on client preferences.
J-05 Select intervention strategies based on client’s current repertoires.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints. 
J-11 Program for stimulus and response generalization. 

Notes:

