D-20 USE RESPONSE INDEPENDENT (TIME-BASED) SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT (I.E., NON-CONTINGENT REINFORCEMENT).

Definition:
“Noncontingent reinforcement (NCR) is the presentation of a potential reinforcer on a fixed-time (FT) or variable time (VT) schedule independent of the occurrence of the target behavior. The response-independent presentation of the potential reinforcer eliminates the contingent relation between the target behavior and the stimulus presentation while allowing any effects of the stimulus presentation alone to be detected.” (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007).

Noncontingent reinforcement is sometimes used in applied research in an experimental design called the NCR reversal technique. This design involves a baseline phase, an NCR phase where a potential reinforcer is delivered on a fixed or variable time schedule independent of the target behavior, and then a phase where the reinforcer is delivered contingent on a set behavioral criteria. These phases are then repeated as necessary to indicate experimental control over the dependent variable. The NCR and baseline conditions function as a comparative measure to validate the independent variable in these studies.
In certain instances, differential reinforcement procedures may limit access to reinforcement if appropriate behavior occurs at low rates. One benefit of an NCR is that it gives consistent access to reinforcement. 

Examples:
A DRO program was trialed for 3 weeks to decrease Jimmy’s verbal protesting during group activities. Based on data collected, the DRO program was deemed ineffective for decreasing Jimmy’s verbal protesting. Mr. Jones took data and found that Jimmy could quietly engage in group activities for 3 minutes before starting to protest. Mr. Jones decided to implement a 2 minute NCR program in which he would give Jimmy a sticker every 2 minutes regardless of the presence of interfering behaviors.

Non- Example:
Mr. Jack was concerned with Barry’s aggressive behavior during group activities. He decided to give him a sticker for every 2 minutes that he did not engage in aggressive behavior.

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor: 



Relevant Literature:
Cautela, J. R. (1984). General level of reinforcement. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 15, 109-114.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 
Hagopian, L. P., Fisher, W. W., & Legacy, S. M. (1994). Schedule effects of noncontingent reinforcement on attention-maintained destructive behavior in identical quadruplets. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 317-325.
Ingvarsson, E.T., Kahng, S., Hausman, N.L. (2008). Some effects of noncontingent positive reinforcement on multiply controlled Problem behavior and compliance in a demand context. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis. 41, 3, 435-440.
Wilder, D. A., Normand, M., & Atwell, J. (2005).  Noncontingent reinforcement as treatment for food refusal and associated self-injury. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 38, 549-553.

Related Lessons:
B-04: Use withdrawal/reversal designs.
C-01: State and plan for the unwanted effects of reinforcement.
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement. 
D-21: Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH)
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.

Notes:
