E-05 use INDEPENDENT, INTERDEPENDENT, AND DEPENDENT GROUP CONTINGENCIES.

Definitions:
The three group contingencies as defined by Cooper, Heron, & Heward (2007):

 “An independent group contingency is an arrangement in which a contingency is presented to all members of a group, but reinforcement is delivered only to those group members who meet the criterion outlined in the contingency.”

“An interdependent group contingency is one in which all members of a group must meet the criterion of the contingency (individually and as a group) before any member earns the reward.”

“Under a dependent group contingency the reward for the whole group is dependent on the performance of an individual student or small group.”

These three contingencies use the principles of reinforcement to change the behavior of a group of individuals. They involve “a common consequence (usually, but not necessarily, a reward intended to function as reinforcement) contingent on the behavior of one member of the group, the behavior of part of the group, or the behavior of everyone in the group.” (Cooper et al. 2007)

Example:
Independent Group Contingency 
Each student was given a math worksheet and received a special sticker if they completed the work without engaging in disruptive behavior. Billy, Johnny, and Sam finished their work quietly and earned stickers, but Danny was disruptive and only finished half his worksheet so he did not earn a sticker.

Interdependent Group Contingency
Each student in Mrs. Kelly’s class had to complete their math worksheets before they were allowed to go outside for recess. The students who finished first were allowed to help any of the struggling students. Sam was the last one working and Roger came over to help him complete his work. Once Sam was finished the whole class earned recess time.

Dependent Group Contingency
At the end of football practice, Mr. Bill told the team that they could stop running wind sprints if Roger caught a long pass from the coach. Roger caught that pass and the team cheered as they went to shower and practice ended.


Write another example: 



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 567-573.
Kamps, D., Howard, W., Heitzman-Powell, L., Laylin, J., Szoke, C., Petrillo, T., & Culey, A. (2011). Class-Wide Function-Related Intervention Teams: Effects of Group Contingency Programs in Urban Classrooms. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 13, 154-167.
Litow, L. & Pumroy, D. K. (1975). A brief review of classroom group-oriented contingencies. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8(3), 341-347. 
Nevin, A., Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (1982). Effects of group and individual contingencies on academic performance and social relations of special needs students. Journal of School Psychology. 116, 1, 41-59.
Theodore, L.., Bray, M., Kehle, T., & Jenson, W. (2001). Randomization of Group Contingencies and Reinforcers to Reduce Classroom Disruptive Behavior. Journal of School Psychology. 39, 3, 267-277. 

Related Lessons:
C-01: State and plan for the unwanted effects of reinforcement.
D-01: Use positive and negative reinforcement.
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement. 
D-19: Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.
D-21: Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH)
E-04: Use contingency contracting
F-02: Use token economies and other conditioned reinforcement systems

Notes:
