K-04 DESIGN AND USE EFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND REINFORCEMENT SYSTEMS.

Rationale
Staff performance in the application of behavioral strategies is critical to the success of the behavior intervention plan. Developing a system to monitor staff performance and motivate staff performance is just as important as developing an effective intervention plan.  

Staff performance models
Richman, Riordan, Reiss, Pyles, and Bailey (1988) found that self-monitoring and supervision feedback increased staff performance.
Arco (2008) found that defining the process before training, providing on-the job supervisory feedback, and having staff provide self-generated outcome feedback before and after training was effective at increasing and maintaining the performance in behavioral treatment programs.  
Codding, Feinberg, Dunn, and Pace (2004) found that treatment integrity increased following a one hour performance feedback session every other week.  Social validity ratings provided favorable feedback for the frequent supervisions.  
Iwata, Bailey, Brown, Foshee, and Alpern (1976) found that performance-based lottery improved the performance of institutional staff.

Elements of providing effective performance based monitoring and reinforcement systems
Provide clear instructions and objectives in observable measurable terms
Develop treatment integrity checklist
Train the supervisor to provide supervision and frequent on the job feedback (both corrective and positive)
Train staff to collect a self-monitoring system for their performance 
Train the supervisor to provide social or tangible reinforcement based on performance of the staff
Teach the supervisor to graph and monitor staff performance while looking for trend lines

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature:  
Arco, L. (2008). Feedback for improving staff training and performance in behavioral treatment programs. Behavioral Interventions, 23(1), 39-64.
Codding, R. S., Feinberg, A. B., Dunn, E. K., & Pace, G. M. (2005). Effects of immediate performance feedback on implementation of behavior support plans. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 38(2), 205-219.
Iwata, B. A., Bailey, J. S., Brown, K. M., Foshee, T. J., & Alpern, M. (1976). A performance-based lottery to improve residential care and training by instituational staff. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 9(4), 417-431.
Richman, G. S., Riordan, M. R., Reiss, M. L., Pyles, D. A., & Bailey, J. S. (1988). The effects of self‐monitoring and supervisor feedback on staff performance in a residential setting. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 21(4), 401-409.

Related Lessons:
D-01 Use positive reinforcement
F-01 Use self-management strategies
F-02 Use token economies and other conditioned reinforcement systems
F-03 Use direct instruction
H-03 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods
H-04 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant qualitative relations
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend and variability
I-01 Define behavior in observable measurable terms
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures
K-05 Design and use systems for monitoring procedural integrity

Notes:
