K-05 DESIGN AND USE SYSTEMS FOR MONITORING PROCEDURAL INTEGRITY.

Definitions:
Procedural Integrity - "The extent to which the independent variable is applied exactly as planned and described and no other unplanned variables are administered inadvertently along with the planned treatment" (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007, pp. 706-707).

Treatment Drift - "An undesirable situation in which the independent variable of an experiment is applied differently during later stages than it was at the outset of the study" (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 706).

Low treatment integrity is not only bad for research (confounding, cannot interpret the results) but can also lead to inconsistencies and poor outcomes in treatments.  These can be related to many factors such as experimenter bias (unfair advantage to see positive results), staff implementing only procedures they favor, treatment too difficult to implement, poor staff training, or staff turnover.

Systems to Avoid Treatment Drift
Precise operational definition
Make behavioral plan simple and easy to administer
Provide competency-based training (use behavior skills training)
Assess treatment integrity

Assessing Treatment Integrity
Provide a brief checklist of each of the components in the treatment plan
May be self-monitored but important to conduct inter-rater reliability
Establish a schedule to complete the treatment integrity
Graph the percent of treatment integrity and monitor to ensure treatment drift does not occur

Write another example:











Questions to ask your supervisor:



















Relevant Literature:  
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson Education, Inc.
Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (2011). Strategies and tactics of behavioral research. Routledge.
Wolery, M. (1994). Procedural fidelity: A reminder of its functions. Journal of Behavioral Education, 4(4), 381-386.
                         
Related Lessons:
F-01 Use self-management strategies
H-03 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods
H-04 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant qualitative relations
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend and variability
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures
K-04 Design and use effective performance monitoring and reinforcement systems

Footnotes: 
Also called procedural fidelity, treatment integrity, procedural reliability, or treatment adherence

Notes: