K-07 EVALUATE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE BEHAVIORAL PROGRAM.

In the field of applied behavior analysis, it is crucial to have ongoing evaluation of the effectiveness of behavior programs.  This helps to ensure that the most effective treatments are being offered to a client based on ethical practices, the most current research, and the individual’s needs.  
Birnbrauer (1999) lists the following steps for evaluating the effectiveness of treatment:
1. Describe the exact purposes of the treatment –what is it intended to achieve? 
2. Describe exactly how the treatment is conducted –there should be no mystery or secrecy about the methods and procedures being used. 
3. Describe how treatment effects were measured –what numerical data were collected and how were they collected? 
4. Show before and after data collected by independent, unbiased evaluators
5. Show follow up data –do the persons maintain gains? Do they continue to improve? Do they regress? 
“The data obtained throughout a behavior change program or a research study are the means for that contract; they form the empirical basis for every important decision: to continue with the present procedure, to try a different intervention, or to reinstitute a previous condition” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 167).  It is important that if there is evidence of behavioral regression or that the treatment package is ineffective, that the team re-evaluate, make changes or adjustments, or discontinue a behavioral program entirely.  It is unethical to continue a behavioral program that is deemed ineffective. 

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor: 



















Relevant Literature:
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts: 2nd Expanded Edition. Taylor & Francis.
Birnbrauer, J.S (1999).  How to Evaluate Intervention Programs.  Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies, Inc.
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

Related Lessons:
B-01 Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
FK-47 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, interresponse time).
G-01 Review records and available data at the outset of the case.
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-01 State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
K-07 Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.

Notes:
