I-01 DEFINE BEHAVIOR IN OBSERVABLE AND MEASUREABLE TERMS.

The importance of defining behavior in observable and measurable terms:
As Baer, Wolf and Risley said in 1968, “since the behavior of an individual is composed of physical events, its scientific study requires their precise measurement” (p. 93). In order to be scientific in our study of behavior, we must be very clear about what behavior it is we are actually studying. Therefore, the target behavior must be observable and measurable. Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007) also make the point that one of the most basic tenets of science is replication. In order for other scientists to replicate an experiment or study, the definition of the behavior under investigation and how it was measured must be transparent enough, that future replication is possible.

Technically-sound written definitions of target behaviors
Cooper, Heron, and Heward, (2007), suggest that a good behavioral definition is:
Operational (it allows the practitioner to obtain complete information about a behavior’s occurrence/non-occurrence and allows the accurate application of the procedures.)
Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007) also state that good definitions increase the likelihood that an accurate evaluation of the effectiveness of a study or experiment will be conducted.

Two types of target behavior definitions
Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007, p. 65) suggest that there are two types of target behavior definitions:
Functional (These types of definition label responses as part of the target behavior’s response class if they have the same effect upon the environment.)
Topographical (These types of definition look at the shape or form of the target behavior.)

How to write behavioral definitions
Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007) cite Hawkins and Dobes (1977) as giving three characteristics of good written target behavior definitions:
Objective (should refer only to observable characteristics of the behavior and environment and shouldn’t utilize inferential terms, such as “feeling angry”.)
Clear (the definition should be readable and unambiguous.)
Complete (it should outline the boundaries of what is included as an instance of a response and what is not included.)

Write another example: 

Notes:














Questions to ask your supervisor:














Relevant Literature: 
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. (1968). Some current dimensions of applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 91-97.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. 
Hawkins, R. P., & Dobes, R. W. (1977). Behavioral definitions in applied behavior analysis: Explicit or implicit? In B. C. Etzel, J. M. LeBlanc, & D. M. Baer (Eds.), New developments in behavioral research: Theory, method, and application (pp. 167-188). 
Van Houten, R. (1979). Social Validation: The evolution of standards of competency for target behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 197-203.

Related Lessons:
H-01: Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording
H-02: Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
I-02: Define environmental variables on observable and measurable terms
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms
FK-47: Identify the observable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, interresponse time)