G-03 CONDUCT A PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF THE CLIENT IN ORDER TO IDENTIFY THE REFERRAL PROBLEM.

Definition:
Behavioral assessment - “A form of assessment that involves a full range of inquiry methods (observation, interview, testing, and the systematic manipulation of antecedent or consequent variables) to identify probable antecedent and consequent controlling variables. Behavioral assessment is designed to discover resources, assets, significant others, competing contingencies, maintenance and generality factors, and possible reinforcers and/or punishers that surround the potential target behavior" (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 691).
Five Phases of a Behavioral Assessment 
Hawkins (1979) described behavioral assessment as being funnel shaped, beginning with a broad scope and then moving to a narrow focus.  
1. Screening and general disposition
2. Defining and quantifying problems or goals
3. Pinpointing the target behavior
4. Monitoring progress
5. Follow-up
The preliminary assessment consists of the first 3 phases of this model.  It is the broad gathering of information needed in order to pinpoint the target behavior. Once the target behavior is selected, a formal functional behavioral assessment is required. 
 
Preliminary Assessment 
Assessment Methods* 
1. Interviews (client and significant others) 
2. Checklists  
3. Standardized Tests 
4. Direct Observations  

Write another example:





















Social Significance  
Before selecting a target behavior, it is important to reflect on how important the behavior change is for the client, not to others around the client.  The rational for the behavior change must be critically analyzed.  Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007) suggest the following methods for determining the social significance of the target behavior 
Is the behavior likely to produce reinforcement in the natural environment?
Is the skill useful?
Will it increase the individual's access to new reinforcing environments?
Will it allow more social interaction? 
Is it a pivotal behavior? 
Is it a behavior cusp?
Is it age-appropriate? 
If it is a behavior to be eliminated?
What is the replacement skill? 
Is the identified behavior actually problematic? 
Is this the identified behavior just reports or is it real? 

Prioritizing Target Behaviors 
If a number of target behaviors are selected which are socially significant, it is then important to prioritize the target behavior ensuring dangerous behavior is targeted first.  Other guidelines are listed by Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007) as the following: 
Pose a danger to client or others? 
How often does it occur? 
How longstanding is the problem? 
Will changing the behavior produce higher rates of reinforcement? 
What is the importance related to overall independence? 
Will changing the behavior reduce negative attention? 
Will changing the behavior produce positive attention? 
How likely is success of changing the behavior? 
How much will it cost to change the behavior? 

Defining the Target Behavior 
Before beginning, the target behavior must be objectively and concisely defined in a clear concrete observable manner. 
 
Setting the Criteria for Behavior Change 
Goals must be socially meaningful to the person's life.   

Questions to ask your supervisor:










































































Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts: 2nd Expanded Edition. Taylor & Francis. 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson Education, Inc.
Hawkins, R. P. (1979). The functions of assessment: Implications for selection and development of  
devices for assessing repertoires in clinical, educational, and other settings. Journal of Applied  
       Behavior Analysis, 12(4), 501-516. 
Linehan, M. M. (1977). Issues in behavioral interviewing. Behavioral assessment: New directions in clinical psychology. New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Houten, R. V. (1979). Social validation: The evolution of standards of competency for target behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 12(4), 581-591. 

Related Lessons: 
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms 
I-02 Define environmental variables inobservable and measurable terms 
J-01 State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms 

Notes: