B – 06 USE CHANGING CRITERION DESIGNS.

Definition (Changing criterion design): 


















 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Changing criterion design and guidelines): 


















 (Hartmann & Hall, 1976).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Example: 
Jim created a classwide reinforcement program to increase the vocabulary test scores of a 1st grade class. He wanted to make sure that the reinforcement program was effective so he set specific score criterion for the class, to monitor their progress. Average baseline test scores were 55 % correct for the entire class. Jim set the first criterion phase at 70% of the test questions answered correctly for the entire class. After 4 weeks, the class met these criteria for 3 consecutive tests, so Jim set the classroom performance criterion to 80% of the test questions answered correctly. This time the class met the criterion in 3 weeks and Jim increased the criterion to 90%. Once again, the class met these criteria for 3 consecutive tests. Jim concluded that his intervention was likely responsible for the change in test scores, since the test score reliably increased when the criteria were altered and required a greater score.

Non-Example: 
John created a reinforcement program to increase Larry’s rate of answering questions during class. After 3 weeks, the data indicated that Larry was answering more questions appropriately in class. However, there was a new teacher in the classroom and other variables that may have accounted for this change. John wanted to see if the program was increasing this behavior, so he decided to remove the reinforcement program for a week to see if Larry’s rate of answering questions decreased.

Write another example:































Questions to ask your supervisor:
































































Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  
Hartmann, D.P. & Hall, R.V. (1976). The changing criterion design. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 9, 4, 527-532.
McDougall, D. (2005). The range-bound changing criterion design. Behavioral Interventions, 20, 2, 129-137.
McLaughlin, T.F. (1983). An examination and evaluation of single subject designs used in behavior analysis research in school settings. Educational Research Quarterly, 7, 4, 35-42.
Hall, R.V., & Fox, R.G. (1977). Changing criterion designs: An alternative applied behavior analysis procedure. In B.C. Etzel, J.M. LeBlanc, & D.M. Baer (Eds.). New developments in behavioral research: Theory, method, and application (pp. 151-166). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allen, K.D., & Evans, J.H. (2001). Exposure-based treatment to control excessive blood glucose monitoring. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 34, 497-500.

Related Lessons: 
B-04: Use withdrawal/reversal designs
B-05: Use alternating treatments (i.e., multi-element) designs
B-07: Use multiple baseline designs
B-09: Conduct a component analysis to determine the effective components of an intervention package
B-11: Conduct a parametric analysis to determine the effective values of an independent variable. 
H-04: Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability. 
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms

Notes:
