H-01 select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.

Assessment and treatment decisions of behavior analysts rely on data. A behavior analyst can design and implement effective treatments only when the data accurately represent the behavior of interest (validity) and have been reliably recorded as they are observed. To accomplish this goal, behavior analysts choose behaviors and dimensions of those behaviors to facilitate accurate and consistent recording within a given context for each client. Behavior analysts measure “three fundamental properties, or dimensional quantities” (Cooper et al., 2007, p. 75) of behavior: 
Repeatability--Behavior can be counted in the same way each time it occurs.
Temporal extent--Behavior can be measured in relation to time.
Temporal locus—Behavior occurs in relation to other behaviors.

First, identify which of these three properties will provide the most accurate method for quantifying behavior. Then, decides what dimension of behavior to measure, such as a count of occurrences, frequency of behavior per unit of time, duration, latency, or other. Last, decide who will record the behavior and in what context. If a preferred measurement system is unlikely to be effectively implemented, then the analyst has to reconsider definitions or recording circumstances in order to obtain adequate and accurate data for decision-making. 

Examples:
A teacher is asked to record the number of times a student yells out inappropriate language in class each day. Since the time the student spends in class varies widely during the week, the behavior analyst designed a measurement system to record rate (number of occurrences divided by time in class) of yelling out inappropriate language. With these data, the behavior analyst can compare the student’s behavior across time of unequal durations. 
A parent is committed to accurately recording data to show duration of a child’s tantrums, but found that she was not always in close proximity with the child when the behavior begins. The behavior analyst identifies two conditions during the day when the mother can accurately record duration of each tantrum (the first 30 minutes after school and the last 30 minutes before bedtime). The mother records duration of total tantruming behavior during each 30 mimute-observation twice a day.

Write another example:





















































Questions to ask your supervisor:























Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Gast, D. L. (2010). Single subject research methodology in behavioral sciences. New York: NY: Routledge.

Related Lessons:
A-01 Measure frequency
A-02 Measure rate (i.e., count per unit time).
A-03 Measure duration
A-04 Measure latency
A-09 Evaluate the accuracy and reliability of measurement procedures. 
A-10 Design, plot, and interpret data using equal-interval graphs.
D-05 Use shaping.
H-02 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability.
H-05 Evaluate temporal relations between observed variables (within & between sessions, time series).
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
K-07 Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.
FK-33 functional relations
FK-41 contingency-shaped behavior
FK-47 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g. rate, duration, latency, interresponse time)
FK-48 State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g. partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling.) 

Notes: