H-02 SELECT A SCHEDULE OF OBSERVATION AND RECORDING PERIODS.

BCBAs select the most appropriate forms of measurement. The target behavior should have a clear and observable operational definition so that it can be recorded during a period of observation. Using a consistent measurement procedure and schedule of observation will help ensure that the data are truly reflective of the target behavior you want to measure. Specify a time interval (or observation period) for recording data. Additionally, time intervals used in interval recording should remain consistent across observations (e.g., if you collect data on a target behavior during a 15 minute observation using 30-second partial intervals then you should use the same procedure on subsequent observations).  If you change any aspect of the operational definition, observational period, or measurement procedures, explain the change when presenting data.

Example:
If your client’s parent reported that aggression only happens when the client is asked to brush their teeth, then you want to ensure that you can observe the client during times they are asked to brush their teeth.
An instructor wanted to use the PLACHECK measurement procedure to record his students’ involvement in an in-class group assignment.  It would be appropriate to collect these data when students separate into groups and start the assignment.  Recording data during the lecture or a test would not be an appropriate observation period.

Write another example:






















Questions to ask your supervisor:


























Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Measuring behavior. Applied Behavior Analysis (pp. 72-101). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Bailey, J. & Burch, M. (2010). 25 Essential Skills and Strategies for the Professional Behavior Analyst: Expert Tips for Maximizing Consulting Effectiveness. New York, NY: Routledge.

Related Lessons:
A-01 Measure frequency (i.e., count).
A-02 Measure rate (i.e., count per unit time).
A-03 Measure duration.
A-04 Measure latency.
A-05 Measure interresponse time (IRT).
A-06 Measure percent of occurrence.
A-07 Measure trials to criterion.
A-12 Design and implement continuous measurement procedures (e.g., event recording).
A-13 Design and implement discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial & whole interval, momentary time sampling).
A-14 Design and implement choice measures.
FK-47 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, interresponse time).
FK-48 State the advantages and disadvantages of using continuous measurement procedures and discontinuous measurement procedures (e.g., partial- and whole-interval recording, momentary time sampling).
Notes: