G-02 CONSIDER BIOLOGICAL/MEDICAL VARIABLES THAT MAY BE AFFECTING THE CLIENT.

The Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) instructs that a “behavior analyst recommends seeking a medical consultation if there is any reasonable possibility that a referred behavior influenced by medical or biological variables” in section 3.02 Medical Consultation, of the BACB professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts (2014)
This is relevant both in research and practice. Therefore, the first step in the assessment process should be to determine whether the problem may be due to a medical/biological issue and whether a medical evaluation has been completed (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007). Failure to rule out medical needs would be unethical as it would delay potentially necessary medical treatment that may even prove life threatening dependent on the medical concerns or the severity of the challenging behavior.
Possible pain related disorders or other medical/biological disorders that restrict an individual’s ability to engage in appropriate behavior should be investigated.  Some relevant behavioral topics correlated with a high likelihood of medical and biological causes are feeding disorders, toileting challenges (e.g., encopresis and incontinence), sleep problems and self-injury. Take self-injury for example; studies have shown that self-injurious behavior (SIB) has been maintained by pain attenuation which, can be categorized as automatic negative reinforcement behavior (Carr & Smith, 1995; O’Reilly, 1997).  In detail, an increase in painful stimulation is an establishing operation (EO), thereby increasing behavior that has been reinforced by pain reduction.
Aside from the common examples presented above, it is possible that any form of challenging behavior could be a result of an underlying medical or biological issue. For example, aggressive behavior may also be related to pain related disorders which act as an EO (Carr et al., 2003; Skinner, 1953). The argument has also been made that aggressive behavior in response to painful stimulation may be respondent behavior (Ulrich & Azrin, 1962). Furthermore, Kennedy and Meyer (1996) found that the occurrence of allergy symptoms and sleep deprivation were correlated with an increase in escape maintained challenging behavior. 

Write another example:








Questions to ask your supervisor:









Relevant Literature: 
Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) Behavior Analyst Certification Board professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts. 2014. Retrieved from http://www.bacb.com/Downloadfiles/BACB_Compliance_Code.pdf.
Carr, E. G., Smith, C. E., Giacin, T. A., Whelan, B. M., & Pancari, J. (2003). Menstrual discomfort as a biological setting event for severe problem behavior: Assessment and intervention. Journal Information, 108(2).
Carr, E. G., & Smith, C. E. (1995). Biological setting events for self‐injury. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 1(2), 94-98.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Kennedy, C. H., & Meyer, K. A. (1996). Sleep deprivation, allergy symptoms, and negatively reinforced problem behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29(1), 133-135.
O'Reilly, M. F. (1997). Functional analysis of episodic self‐injury correlated with recurrent otitis media. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30(1), 165-167.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. Simon and Schuster.
Ulrich, R. E., & Azrin, N. H. (1962). Reflexive fighting in response to aversive stimulation. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 5(4), 511.

Related Lessons: 
G-01Review records and available data at the outset of the case.
G-03 Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients. 
G-07 Practice within one’s limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, and training, or make referrals as necessary.
FK-13 reflexive relations (US-UR)
FK-26 unconditioned motivating operations

Notes: