G-01 REVIEW RECORDS AND AVAILABLE DATA AT THE OUTSET OF THE CASE. 

An important part of understanding the client you are working with is to take time to review the treatment history of this individual. There are records related to a medical history that would be beneficial to see. This would include medical procedures, medications, and any current health concerns. It’s also important to get the history of treatment related to psychological/behavioral intervention as well. 
Gresham, Watson, Steuart, & Skinner in 2001 recommend that FBAs should include a record review to understand more about the history of the client as well as information regarding previous interventions. 
Matson (2010) summarized this position by saying “The behavior analyst should carefully review records relating to previous attempts to change potential target behaviors. Records indicating previous success with related target behaviors or a history of limited impact on a behaviour despite well-planned and faithfully implemented change programmes may be useful in selecting change targets which can be achieved within meaningful timescales” (p. 35).

Write another example:
















Questions to ask your supervisor:


















Relevant Literature:
Gresham, F. M., Watson, T. S., Steuart, T., & Skinner, C. H. (2001). Functional Behavioral Assessment: Principles, Procedures, and Future Directions. School Psychology Review, 30(2), 156–172.
Matson, J. L. (Ed.). (2010). Applied Behavior Analysis for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (2009 edition). New York: Springer.

Related Lessons:
G-01 Review records and available data at the outset of the case.
G-02 Consider biological/medical variables that may be affecting the client.
G-03 Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
G-04 Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-05 Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (nonmentalistic) terms.
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
G-07 Practice within one’s limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, and training, or make referrals as necessary.
I-03 Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
I-04 Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.
K-01 Provide for ongoing documentation of behavioral services.

Notes: