I-03 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT INDIVIDUALIZED BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES.

“Behavioral assessment involves a variety of methods including direct observations, interviews, checklists, and tests to identify and define targets for behavior change” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 49).

“Applied behavior analysis uses the methods of FBA to identify antecedent and consequent events and to use this information in designing interventions to change socially significant behaviors (Gresham, Watson, & Skinner, 2001, p. 157).”

“FBA is designed to obtain information about  the purpose (function) a behavior serves for a person….FBA is used to identify the type and source of reinforcement for challenging behaviors as the basis for intervention efforts… (Cooper et al., 2007, p. 501).”

“Once the function of behavior is determined, this information is used to design interventions to reduce problem behaviors and to facilitate positive behaviors” (Gresham et al., 2001, p. 158).

The first step in the process is to define the target behaviors that the assessment will focus on. These behaviors are typically identified by teachers, therapists, or caregivers due to their interference with learning, adaptive functioning, and overall quality of life. In following the principles of ABA, the behaviors targeted for assessment must be socially significant.
Another direct method of determining the function of a behavior is to conduct a functional analysis. This involves systematic manipulation of the environment, while controlling variables to evoke the target behavior under conditions representing each possible function. The typical functions of behavior include access to attention, access to tangible items, escape from demands, and automatic reinforcement. During a functional analysis, each function is assessed to determine if they are maintaining the target behavior. FA is considered to be the most reliable source for determining the function of a behavior, but may not be feasible in some settings due to the time it takes to conduct, safety implications (depending on the severity of the target behavior), and resources needed to conduct each experimental phase.
Other methods used to gather information about the function of target behaviors in a behavioral assessment include a thorough review of the client’s previous records (academic reports, past evaluations, behavior support plans, IEP’s, etc.), the use of behavioral rating scales such as the FAST (functional analysis screening tool), MAS (Motivational Assessment Scale), or PBQ (Problem Behavior Questionnaire), structured interviews with caregivers (i.e., functional assessment interview form), direct observation in the target environment (i.e., home, school, community), behavior data collection and analysis, and A-B-C data collection and analysis. These indirect assessments should be used to inform an experimental functional analysis. They are not designed to determine the function of a response on their own.
Once the direct and indirect assessments are completed, this information is analyzed and the BCBA makes recommendations for intervention based on the results of assessments. 

Example: 
Rich is completing an FBA on the aggression of one of his students. After teacher interviews, the completion of rating scales, and several observations in various settings, Rich hypothesizes that the function of aggression is escape from demands. He uses this information to create an intervention plan to decrease aggression at school. 

Write another example:






































Questions to ask your supervisor:
















































Relevant Literature: 
Carr, E. (1993). Behavior analysis is not ultimately about behavior. The Behavior Analyst, 16, 47-49.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 49-71, 300, 335-336, 364-366, 457, 459-460, 499-524.
Gresham, F., Watson, T.S., & Skinner, C.H. (2001). Functional Behavioral Assessment: Principals, Procedures, and Future Directions. School Psychology Review, 30, 2, 156-172.
Iwata, B. A., Dorsey, M. F., Slifer, K. J., Bauman, K. E., & Richman, G. S. (1994). Toward a functional analysis of self‐injury. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 27(2), 197-209.
O’Neill, R., Horner, R., Albin, R., Storey, K., & Sprague, J. (1997). Functional assessment and program development for problem behaviors. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Sprague, J., Sugai, G. & Walker, H. (1998). Antisocial Behavior in Schools. In T.S. Watson & F.M. Gresham (Eds). Handbook of child behavior therapy (pp. 451-474). New York: Pleunum Press.
Witt, J., Daly, E., & Noell, G.H. (2000). Functional Assessment: A step by step guide to solving academic and behavior problems. Longmont, CO. Sopris West.

Related Lessons:
B-03: Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
E-01: Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli.
G-01: Review records at the outset of a case.
G-04: Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
G-05: Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
G-08: Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
H-02: Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-02: Define environmental variables in observable and measurable terms.
I-04: Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.
I-06: Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased. 
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.
J-10: When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.

Notes: