I-04 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT THE FULL RANGE OF FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES.

Definitions:
Functional behavior assessment (FBA) - "A systematic method of assessment for obtaining information about the purposes (functions) a problem behavior serves for a person; results are used to guide the design of an intervention for decreasing the problem behavior and increasing appropriate behavior" (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 696).

Functional analysis (FA) - "An analysis of the purposes of problem behavior, wherein antecedents and consequences representing those in the person's natural routines are arranged within an experimental design so that their separate effects on problem behavior can be observed and measured" (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 696).* The FA is considered to be best practice standard in conducting a functional assessment (Hanley, Iwata, & McCord 2003).  

Descriptive assessment - "Direct observation of problem behavior and the antecedent and consequent events under naturally occurring conditions" (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 693).* The advantages are that the information yields what happens in the individual's natural environment, does not disrupt the individual's routine, and provides information for designing a functional analysis. The disadvantages of these assessments are false positives due to behavior maintained by intermittent reinforcement or the presence of antecedent and consequent events which are often present but have no functional relation, the time required in taking data, and inaccurate data collection. Also, there is little correspondence between descriptive analysis outcomes being compared to functional analysis outcomes (Pence, Roscoe, Bourret, and Ahearn, 2009)

Indirect assessment - “Structured interviews, checklists, rating scales, or questionnaires used to obtain information from people who are familiar with the person exhibiting the problem behavior" (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 697).  The advantages of indirect assessments are that the forms can yield valuable information and are convenient.  The disadvantage is the lack of research supporting the reliability of these measurements.  

The ethical guidelines of BACB requires BCBAs to conduct a functional assessment according to 3.01 Behavior-Analytic Assessment. RBT 
(a) Behavior analysts conduct current assessments prior to making recommendations or developing behavior-change programs. The type of assessment used is determined by clients’ needs and consent, environmental parameters, and other contextual variables. When behavior analysts are developing a behavior-reduction program, they must first conduct a functional assessment.
(b) Behavior analysts have an obligation to collect and graphically display data, using behavior-analytic conventions, in a manner that allows for decisions and recommendations for behavior-change program development (BACB, 2014, p.8).

Role of Functional Behavior Assessment as outlined by Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007).
Identifies antecedent variables that may be altered to prevent problem behaviors.
Identifies reinforcement contingencies which can be altered so problem behavior no longer receives reinforcement.
Identifies reinforcers for alternative replacement behavior.
Reduces the reliance on default technologies such as punishment.

Conducting a functional behavior assessment as outlined by Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007).
Conduct indirect assessments
Conduct a descriptive assessment
Analyze data  from the indirect and descriptive assessment and create a hypotheses 
Test conditions the data suggest may be contributing to the behavior using a functional analysis
Develop intervention strategies based on the results.

Write another example:























Questions to ask your supervisor:



















































Relevant Literature: 
Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. (1987). Some still‐current dimensions of applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 20(4), 313-327.
Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) Behavior Analyst Certification Board professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts. 2014. Retrieved from http://www.bacb.com/Downloadfiles/BACB_Compliance_Code.pdf.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson Education, Inc.
Hanley, G. P., Iwata, B. A., & McCord, B. E. (2003). Functional analysis of problem behavior: A review. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 36(2), 147-185.
Iwata, B. A., Pace, G. M., Dorsey, M. F., Zarcone, J. R., Vollmer, T. R., Smith, R. G. Willis, K. D. (1994). The functions of self-injurious behavior: An experimental-epidemiological analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27(2), 215–240. 
Pence, S. T., Roscoe, E. M., Bourret, J. C., & Ahearn, W. H. (2009). Relative contributions of three descriptive methods: Implications for behavioral assessment. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 42(2), 425-446.
Sasso, G. M., Reimers, T. M., Cooper, L. J., Wacker, D., Berg, W., Steege, M. & Allaire, A. (1992). Use of 
descriptive and experimental analyses to identify the functional properties of aberrant behavior in school settings. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25(4), 809-821.

Related Lessons:
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables
B-05 Use alternating treatment designs
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations
H-05 Evaluate temporal relations between observed variables 
I-03 Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures

Footnotes:
*Functional analysis may also be called an analog analysis or experimental analysis.
*Descriptive analysis may also be called direct assessment.

Notes:
