I-06 MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING BEHAVIORS THAT MUST BE ESTABLISHED, MAINTAINED, INCREASED, OR DECREASED. 

Hawkins (1984, p. 284) (cited from Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007, p. 56) defined habilitation as “the degree to which the person’s repertoire maximizes short and long term reinforcers for that individual and for others, and minimizes short and long term punishers.”

When determining what behaviors to target, one can use the relevance of behavior rule (Ayllon and Azrin, 1968) as a guide. This rule states that a target behavior should only be selected if it is likely to produce reinforcement for the client in their natural environment. Another key factor is deciding if the behavior will generalize to other settings and be sustainable once the behavior change program has ended. 

Cooper et al. (2007) provide some considerations when choosing a target behavior to increase, decrease, or maintain. These include:
1. Does this behavior pose any danger to the client or others?
2. How many opportunities will the person have to use this new behavior? Or how often does this problem behavior occur?
3. How long-standing is the problem or skill deficit?
4. Will changing the behavior produce higher rates of reinforcement for the person?
5. What will be the relative importance of this target behavior to the future skill development and independent functioning?
6. Will changing this behavior reduce negative attention from others?
7. Will the new behavior produce reinforcement for significant others?
8. How likely is success in changing this target behavior?
9. How much will it cost to change this behavior?
Example: 
Dave has decided to implement an intervention to increase a student’s compliance. He chose this because lack of compliance interferes with the student’s ability to learn new skills and access reinforcement by completing their work and daily routines.

Write another example:







Questions to ask your supervisor:









Relevant Literature: 
Ayllon, T. & Azrin, N.H. (1968). The token economy: A motivational system for therapy and rehabilitation. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 55-65, 237-238.
Hawkins, R.P. (1984) What is “meaningful” behavior change in a severely/profoundly retarded learner: The view of a behavior analytic parent. In W.L. Heward, T.E. Heron, D.S. Hill, & J. Trap-Porter (Eds.) Focus on behavior analysis in education. (pp. 282-286). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall/ Merrill. 
Hawkins, R.P. (1986) Selection of target behaviors. In R.O. Nelson & S.C. Hayes (Eds.), Conceptual foundations of behavioral assessment (pp. 331-385). New York: Guilford Press.
Rosales-Ruiz, J. & Baer, D.M. (1997). Behavioral cusps: A developmental and pragmatic concept for behavior analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30, 533-544.

Related Lessons:
B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature. 
G-03: Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
G-05: Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-08: Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-10: When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
J-13: Select behavioral cusps as goals for intervention when appropriate.
FK-10: Behavior, response, response class.

Notes:
