J-13 SELECT BEHAVIORAL CUSPS AS GOALS FOR INTERVENTION WHEN APPROPRIATE. 

“A behavior that has consequences beyond the change itself, some of which may be considered important…What makes a behavior change a cusp is that it exposes the individual’s repertoire to new environments, especially new reinforcers and punishers, new contingencies, new responses, new stimulus controls, and new communities of maintaining or destructive contingencies. When some or all of these events happen, the individual’s repertoire expands; it encounters a differentially selective maintenance of the new as well as some old repertoires, and perhaps that leads to some further cusps.” (Rosales-Ruiz & Baer, 1997, p. 534).

Bosch and Fuqua (2001) cited 5 criteria for a behavior to be considered a behavioral cusp. “They stated that a behavior might be a cusp if it meets one or more of five criteria: “(a) access to new reinforcers, contingencies, and environments; (b) social validity; (c) generativeness; (d) competition with inappropriate responses; and (e) number and the relative importance of people affected.” (Bosch & Fuqua, 2001, p. 125 via Cooper et al., 2007, p. 59).

Examples: 
Common behavioral cusps include crawling, reading, imitation skills, walking, talking, and writing. These skills set the stage for the client to develop and learn many other skills (i.e., reading allows a client to access leisure material, access information, and is necessary in regards to reading street and safety signs, and accessing various other forms of reinforcement).

Write another example:










Questions to ask your supervisor:













Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 58-59.
Rosales-Ruiz, J., & Baer, D. M. (1997). Behavioral cusps: A developmental and pragmatic concept for behavior analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 30, 533–544.
Bosch, S. & Fuqua, R.W. (2001). Behavioral cusps: a model for selecting target behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 34(1), 123-125.


Related Lessons:
G-08: Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-06: Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-01: State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
J-08: Select interventions based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-14: Arrange instructional procedures to promote generative learning (i.e., derived relations).
FK-10: Behavior, response, response class.


Notes:
