C – 03 STATE AND PLAN FOR THE POSSIBLE UNWANTED EFFECTS OF EXTINCTION. 

Definition:
Extinction “occurs when reinforcement of a previously reinforced behavior is discontinued; as a result the frequency of that behavior decreases in the future.” (Cooper, Heron & Howard, 2007) 

Extinction renders target behavior useless and is often a significant component contributing to the effectiveness of a behavioral program. However, extinction should be used with caution. Research has shown that there are two common side effects that may occur when extinction is utilized; these include an extinction burst, defined as “an immediate increase in the frequency of the response after the removal of the positive, negative, or automatic reinforcement” (Cooper, Heron & Howard, 2007), and extinction-induced aggression. Studies have compared withdrawal of reinforcement as an aversive event and responses to extinction are similar to attack responses in laboratory subjects exposed to aversive stimulation, such as heat, shocks and physical blows. (Lerman et al., 1999) Extinction should not be used as a singular intervention when self-injury or aggression is severe and cannot be prevented and appropriate safe-guards cannot be put in place. Other considerations include extinction being inappropriate in settings where maladaptive behaviors are likely to be imitated by others (e.g. in a classroom setting) and when extinction is not feasible.

Research has shown that there are other behavioral strategies that can be utilized to mitigate the unwanted effects of extinction. These include using differential reinforcement of alternative behavior in conjunction with extinction procedures. In situations in which using extinction is not possible, research has shown that by manipulating reinforcement schedules and reinforcement parameters (e.g. quality, duration, immediacy of reinforcement) to favoring appropriate behavior rather than problem behavior, problem behavior has also been shown to decrease. (Athens & Vollmer, 2010).

Example: 
If an individual engages in physical aggression for attention, response-blocking may be enough to reinforce the individual’s behavior.

Write another example:
















Questions to ask your supervisor: 
















Relevant Literature: 
Athen, E.S., & Vollmer, T.R., (2010). An investigation of differential reinforcement of alternative behavior without extinction. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 43(4), 569-589. 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lerman, D.C., & Iwata, B.A., (1995). Prevalence of the extinction burst and its attenuation during treatment. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 28(1), 93-94.
Lerman, D.C., Iwata, B.A., & Wallace, M.D., (1999). Side effects of extinction: Prevalence of bursting and aggression during the treatment of self-injurious behavior.  Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 32 (1), 1-8. 

Related Lessons: 
D-02 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
D-18. Use Extinction.
D.-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli. 
E-08 Use the matching law and recognize factors influencing choice. 
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients. 
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased or decreased. 
J-05 Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires. 
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-09 Identify and address practical and ethical considerations when using experimental designs to demonstrate program effectiveness. 
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.

Notes:
