FK-22 EXTINCTION

Definition (Extinction): 








 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Examples:
A young woman at a group home was observed to scream loudly every time she was instructed to wash her hands. Each time she began screaming, she was allowed to avoid the task for an average of ten minutes or escape the task altogether. A behavioral analyst instructed group home staff to put this behavior on extinction.  After being instructed to wash her hands, group home staff physically guided her to comply even if she began screaming. After a week, screaming decreased to near zero levels.

Different types of extinction:
Extinction of behavior maintained by positive reinforcement: This occurs when behavior to access tangibles, activities, and/or attention is no longer reinforced. 

Extinction of behavior maintained by negative reinforcement: This occurs when behavior to avoid/escape an aversive stimulus/event is no longer reinforced. 

Extinction of behavior maintained by automatic reinforcement: This occurs when behavior that provides a natural and automatic sensory consequence is no longer reinforced. (i.e., a child is blocked each time he raises both hands above his mid-line to engage in hand-flapping.) 

Non-example: 
A young woman at a group home was observed to scream loudly every time she was instructed to wash her hands. Each time she began screaming, she was allowed to avoid the task for an average of ten minutes or escape the task altogether. When she engaged in screaming, group home staff would tell her that if she stopped screaming and complied she would be given chips, a preferred food.




Write another example:














Questions to ask your supervisor:
















Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lerman, D. C., Iwata, B. A., & Wallace, M. D. (1999). Side effects of extinction: prevalence of bursting and aggression during the treatment of self-injurious behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 32(1), 1-8.
Magee, S. K., & Ellis, J. (2000). Extinction effects during the assessment of multiple problem behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 33(3), 313-316.

Related Lessons: 
C-03 State and plan for unwanted effects of extinction
D-18. Use Extinction.
D.-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.

Notes:
