J-03 SELECT INTERVENTION STRATEGIES BASED ON TASK ANALYSIS.

What are the options for intervention strategies when it comes to teaching a chain of behavior through a task analysis?
Once a person’s baseline level has been assessed (through the single or multiple-opportunity method*) to determine what components of the task analysis he/she can perform, the appropriate intervention strategy needs to be selected. Cooper, Heron & Heward (2007) suggest there are four appropriate intervention strategies which practitioners can choose from; forward chaining, total-task chaining, and backward chaining.
Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007, p. 446) argue that research to date does not suggest a clear answer to the question “which chaining strategy to use?” As such, it is very important to examine the results of the baseline level assessment, to consider the client and how they learn best, and what the different intervention strategies can offer in different situations, in order to select the most appropriate method.

Total-task chaining
If the client performs quite a few steps in the task analysis but is not performing them in the correct sequence, the most appropriate method to choose would probably be total-task chaining. 
Total-task chaining would also be an appropriate intervention strategy to select when the client has generalized motor imitation and moderate to severe disabilities (Test et al., 1990, cited from Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007).
When the chain is quite short and not too complex, this may also be an appropriate teaching method to utilize (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007).

Forward chaining
This approach may be more appropriate to use when the client has demonstrated more proficiency with the first couple of steps in the chain and/or the last steps in the chain are more complex to complete. 
It may also be useful to use this approach when it is necessary to link smaller chains into larger ones. For example, if you have a skill such as bed making and this is made up of perhaps four/five skill clusters, forward chaining is a useful method to link the skill clusters altogether (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007).
Backward chaining
Backward chaining may be more appropriate to use when the client has demonstrated more proficiency with the last couple of steps in the chain and/or steps that appear earlier in the chain are more complex to complete.

Write another example:








Questions to ask your supervisor:





















Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Kazdin, A. E. (2001). Behavior Modifications in applied settings (6th ed). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Miltenberger, R. G. (2001). Behavior Modification: Principles and procedures (2nd ed). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Test, D. W., Spooner, F. Keul, P. K., & Grossi, T. (1990). Teaching adolescents with severe disability to use the public telephone. Behavior Modification, 14, 157-171. Cited from, Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007, p. 446). Applied Behavior Analysis, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. 

Related Lessons:
D-06: Use chaining
D-07: Conduct task analyses
J-02: Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
J-05: Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoire

Footnotes
* Please see task list item D-07 for more information on conducting task analyses
* Please see task list item D-06 for a more detailed description of the different chaining procedures.

Notes:
