C – 02 state and plan for the possible unwanted effects of punishment. 

Definition:
Punishment is one such technique that is sometimes used to change or shape behavior.  While this technique can be effective, there may be unwanted or undesirable effects of this treatment option. 

Punishment may also have unwanted effects with regards to an individual’s future learning.  It may not appropriately generalize to new situations requiring further intervention. When used as the sole intervention in a treatment package, it fails to teach an individual an alternative behavior to engage in and consequently individuals may revert back to old behaviors without a replacement strategy. These behaviors may diminish temporarily only to be subject to a “recovery of responding” (Catania, 1998) at a later period of time.  
As a result, the majority of those in the field agree that “punishment be limited to those situations in which other interventions have failed (May, Risley, Twardosz, Friedman, Bijou, Wexler et al., 1975). Iwata et. Al, 1994 found that “reinforcement approaches to behavior reduction were just as effective as punishment approaches” and that if a functional analysis of the problem behavior was done, the need for the use of punishment procedures was greatly reduced.  
During the supervision process, be diligent in choosing interventions, which are based on reinforcement and not solely on punishment.  The function of a problem behavior should always be assessed before making decisions regarding an individual’s program to ensure effective treatment.  If a team has deemed that punishment is necessary as a part of a treatment package, it is important to state any potential unwanted effects of any procedure being utilized and to attempt to plan for these.  These are some general guidelines to consider when planning for these effects:
A team should always adhere to the “Fair Pair Rule” when using punishment.  This states that a “practitioner should choose one or more alternatives to increase for every behavior targeted for reduction” (White and Haring, 1980).
Be sure to plan for continuation of the procedure to different environments, staff and stimuli (any and all that apply).
Avoid modeling any behavior which you do not want the adult or child to imitate
The team should develop a contingency plan for managing aggression or extreme emotional responses (should they occur) and have safety measures in place to avoid accidental injury to the individual.
The team should develop a plan to manage any escape/avoidant behaviors that may occur 
Be aware the effects of punishment can be difficult to predict.  Staff may need to adjust the plan over time if the effects are not therapeutic or effective.  

Example: 
For instance, those individuals who are being treated using punishment procedures may become aggressive (Azrin & Holz, 1966) or may have strong emotional reactions to such measures.  
An adult or child may become subject to negative modeling (such as imitating scolding or hitting behavior).
Those treated through the use of punishment may seek out escape/avoidance of the punisher or the contingencies surrounding punishment. 
In extreme cases, the use of punishment can result in harm or injury to the child or adult.  

Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor:











Relevant Literature: 
Azrin, N.H., & Holz, W.C. (1966).  Punishment.  In W.K. Honig (Ed), Operant Behavior: Areas of Research and Application.  New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.  
Catania, C.A. (1998).  Learning.  Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Iwata, B. A., Dorsey, M. F., Slifer, K. J., Bauman, K. E. and Richman, G. S. (1994). Toward a Functional Analysis of Self-injury. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27: 197–209. 
May, J. G., Risley, T. R., Twardosz, S., Friedman, P., Bijou, S., Wexler, D., et al. (1975). Guidelines for the use of behavioral procedures in state programs for the retarded. NARC Monograph, M. R. Research, 1.
White, O.R. & Haring, N.G. (1980).  Exceptional Teaching (2nd ed.). Columbus, O.H.:  Charles E. Merrill.  

Related Lessons: 
C-02 State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of punishment.
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment.
D-17 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment.
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.
E-07 Plan for behavioral contrast effects.
FK-31 Behavioral contingencies

Notes: