D-15 identify punishers.

Definition: 
 “A stimulus change that decreases the future frequency of behavior that immediately precedes it (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007)”.  

Punishers can be categorized as unconditioned or conditioned. Unconditioned punishers, or unlearned punishers, are stimuli whose presentation functions as punishment without previous pairing with any other punishers. Such punishers consist of stimulation such as pain, intense odors, visual stimulation, taste, sound, or extreme temperatures (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  Conditioned punishers, or learned punishers, are stimuli whose presentation has previously been paired with an unconditioned punisher or a previously conditioned punisher (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). The process of punishment is a naturally occurring phenomenon that causes behavior change.  However, punishment procedures can also be an effective means for decreasing challenging behavior that is life threatening or resistant to other forms of intervention in an ethical manner.  Iwata (1988) recommends that behavior analysts view the use of punishers as a default technology to be used when other interventions have failed. 

Regarding the selection of a punisher to use in an intervention, it is important to note that punishers are idiosyncratic. A punisher for one person maybe a reinforcer for someone else, and perhaps a neutral stimulus to another. For this reason, a punisher assessment can assist in identifying stimuli that will likely function as punishers by measuring avoidance and escape behavior following the presentation with each stimulus (Fisher et al., 1994). Once potential punishers have been identified there are some factors to consider when choosing a stimulus to use in the treatment of challenging behavior. Research has indicated that the magnitude, or amount of the punisher, should be delivered at the optimum level at the outset of the intervention (Azrin & Holz, 1966; Thompson et al., 1999).  Furthermore, in keeping with ethical considerations the selection of the least intrusive punisher(s) is recommended.  Typically intrusiveness is outlined by hierarchically arranging interventions according to the degree to which the intervention limits individual freedom, intrudes into the child’s life, or produces discomfort, pain, or distress (Luiselli, 2008). Pairing procedures may be beneficial in assisting with the identification of less intrusive punishers by establishing less intrusive conditioned punishers (Vorndran & Lerman, 2006).  Lastly, it should be noted that Lerman and Vorndran (2002) highlighted the need for further basic and applied research on punishment due to a need for identifying strategies to enhance the effectiveness of least intrusive punishment procedures. 


Example: 
If a person eats yogurt and immediately gags or vomits, yogurt may become a conditioned aversive and thereby a conditioned punisher by decreasing the behavior of eating yogurt and possibly other food with a similar consistency to yogurt.

Write another example:










Questions to ask your supervisor:











Relevant Literature: 
Azrin, N. H., & Holz, W. C. (1966). Punishment. Operant behavior: Areas of research and application, 380-447.
Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) Behavior Analyst Certification Board professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts. 2014. Retrieved from http://www.bacb.com/Downloadfiles/BACB_Compliance_Code.pdf.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Fisher, W. W., Piazza, C. C., Bowman, L. G., Kurtz, P. F., Sherer, M. R., & Lachman, S. R. (1994). A preliminary evaluation of empirically derived consequences for the treatment of pica. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 27(3), 447-457.
Iwata, B. A. (1988). The development and adoption of controversial default technologies. The Behavior Analyst, 11(2), 149.
Lerman, D. C., & Vorndran, C. M. (2002). On the status of knowledge for using punishment: Implications for treating behavior disorders. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 35(4), 431-464.
Luiselli, J. K. (Ed.). (2008). Effective practices for children with autism: Educational and behavior support interventions that work. Oxford University Press.
Thompson, R. H., Iwata, B. A., Conners, J., & Roscoe, E. M. (1999). Effects of reinforcement for alternative behavior during punishment of self-injury. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 32(3), 317.
Vorndran, C. M., & Lerman, D. C. (2006). Establishing and maintaining treatment effects with less intrusive consequences via a pairing procedure. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 39(1), 35-48.

Related Lessons: 
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment. 
D-17 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment. 
J-02 Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
FK-19 unconditioned punishment
FK-20 conditioned punishment
FK-21 schedules of reinforcement and punishment
FK-23 automatic reinforcement and punishment

Notes: