E-11 use pairing procedures to establish new conditioned reinforcers and punishers.
“Stimulus events or conditions that are present or that occur just before or simultaneous with the occurrence of other reinforcers (or punishers) may acquire the ability to reinforce (or punish) behavior when they later occur on their own as consequences. Called conditioned reinforcers or conditioned punishers, these stimulus changes function as reinforcers and punishers only because of their prior pairing with other reinforcers or punishers” (Cooper et al., 2007, p. 40).

Definition:
Conditioned reinforcer – “…a previously neutral stimulus change that has acquired the capability to function as a reinforcer through stimulus-stimulus pairing with one or more unconditioned or conditioned reinforcers” (Cooper et al., 2007, p. 269).
Some common conditioned reinforcers include social praise, tokens, and money because they are often paired with other reinforcers. 
Conditioned reinforcers become stronger the more they are paired with other known reinforcers. For instance, paper money will likely not function as a reinforcer until he/she buy toys, candy, and other things that he enjoys with it. The more the child uses money to buy items that are appetitive, the more the paper money becomes a conditioned reinforcer.
The more items the conditioned reinforcer can “buy”, the less sensitive to motivating operations they become. This is called generalized conditioned reinforcement. The more reinforcers that have been paired with the stimulus, the more generalized the conditioned reinforcer is.

Examples:
Common conditioned reinforcers include social praise, tokens, and money because they are often paired with other reinforcers. 

Write another example:

















Questions to ask your supervisor:
















Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 40-41, 269-270.
Williams, B.A. & Fantino, E. (1978). Effects on choice of reinforcement delay and conditioned reinforcement. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 29, 1, 77-86.
Engelmann, S. (1975). Your child can succeed. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster. (pp. 98-100).
Morse, W.H. & Kelleher, R.T. (1977). Determinants of reinforcement and punishment. In W.K. Honig & J.E.R. Staddon (Eds.), Handbook of operant behavior (pp. 174-200). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Related Lessons:
C-01: State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of reinforcement.
D-01: Use positive and negative reinforcement. 
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
E-02: Use discrimination training procedures.
F-02: Use token economies and other conditioned reinforcement systems.
I-07: Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers.
J-04: Select intervention strategies based on client preferences.
J-11: Program for stimulus and response generalization.
FK-14: Respondent conditioning (CS-CR)
FK-16: Respondent-operant interactions
FK-18: Conditioned reinforcement
FK-21: Schedules of reinforcement and punishment
FK-27: Conditioned motivating operations
FK-34: Conditional discriminations

Notes: