FK-20 CONDITIONED PUNISHMENT.

Definition (Conditioned punisher):







 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Conditioned punishment): 


 







(Hake & Azrin, 1965). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Examples:
Similar to classical conditioning, a tone (neutral stimulus) is repeatedly paired with an electric shock (unconditioned punisher) whenever a dog barks, in time the tone (conditioned punisher) suppresses the bark in the absence of the electric shock.

A child engages in aggression. A parent responds to aggression by taking away their child’s favorite video game contingent on every instance of aggression.  The parent begins to pair removal of the video games with a reprimand.  The reprimand may function as a conditioned punisher if aggression continues to decrease following the presentation of a reprimand without taking away the video games.  This process illustrates conditioned punishment.

Write another example:











Questions to ask your supervisor: 
















Relevant Literature: 
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics in Behavior Analysis (2nd ed). New York, NY: Routledge.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Measuring behavior. Applied Behavior Analysis (pp. 72-101). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hake, D. F., & Azrin, N. H. (1965). Conditioned punishment. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 8, 279-293.
Iwata, B. A. (1988). The development and adoption of controversial default technologies. The Behavior Analyst, 11, 149-157.

Related Lessons: 
C-02 State and plan for the possible unwanted effects of punishment.
D-15 Identify punishers.
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment.
D-17 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment.
D-18 Use extinction.
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.
FK-14 respondent conditioning (CS-CR) 
FK-17 unconditioned reinforcement
FK-18 conditioned reinforcement
FK-19 unconditioned punishment
FK-21 schedules of reinforcement and punishment

Notes: