FK-30 DISTINGUISH BETWEEN MOTIVATING OPERATION AND REINFORCEMENT EFFECTS.

Definition (Motivating Operations):


 







 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Value altering effect): 











 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency


















Definition (Behavior altering effect): 











 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency







Example: 
Being deprived of food or water increases the reinforcing value of food and water (i.e., a value altering effect in which the MO functions as an EO), and there will likely be an increase in the current frequency of all behavior that has previously been reinforced with food and water (i.e., an evocative behavior-altering effect).  Conversely, if a large meal was just consumed then it is unlikely that food will be reinforcing (i.e., a value-altering effect in which the MO functions as an AO) and there will be a reduction in the current frequency of all behavior previously reinforced with food (i.e., an abative behavior-altering effect).

This next example can illustrate the difference between MO effects and reinforcement/punishment effects (i.e., repertoire-altering effects).  Before leaving for work you realize that it is going to be a cold day.  The heater in your car does not work well so you plan ahead by putting a blanket and extra jacket in your car to use if it becomes too cold. During your drive to work, it becomes increasingly cold so you turn on your car heater, put your extra jacket on, and lay the blanket over you so you become much warmer.  In this example, there was an increase in the current frequency of all behavior that has been reinforced by becoming warmer (i.e., an evocative behavior-altering effect).  For the rest of the winter, to avoid becoming too cold on your drive to work, you leave every morning already wearing an extra jacket and put a blanket on you as soon as you get in the car (i.e., repertoire-altering effect on future behavior).  

Write another example:







Questions to ask your supervisor:





Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Motivating operations. Applied Behavior Analysis (pp. 374-391). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Iwata, B. A., Smith, R. G., & Michael, J. (2000). Current research on the influence of establishing operating on behavior in applied settings. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 33, 411-418.
Laraway, S., Snycerski, S., Michael, J., & Poling, A. (2001). The abative effect: A new term to describe the action of antecedents that reduce operant responding. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 18, 101-104.
Schlinger, H., & Blakely, E. (1987). Function-altering effects of contingency-specifying stimuli. The Behavior Analyst, 10, 41-45.

Related Lessons: 
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli.
FK-25 multiple functions of a single stimulus
FK-26 unconditioned motivating operations
FK-27 conditioned motivating operations
FK-28 transitive, reflexive, surrogate motivating operations
FK-29 distinguish between the discriminative stimulus and the motivating operation 

Notes:
