FK-15 OPERANT CONDITIONING.

Definition (Operant conditioning):




 

(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Example:
A rat is deprived of food. The rat walks near a specific part of their cage and receives food. As a result, the future probability of the rat walking toward that area of the cage increases.

A child hits his sibling when fighting over a toy. The child is sent to timeout. As a result, the future probability of hitting their sister decreases.


Write another example:






Questions to ask your supervisor:





Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
McAllister, L. W., Stachowiak, J. G., Baer, D. M., & Conderman, L. (1969). The application of operant conditioning techniques in a secondary school classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 2(4), 277-285.

Related Lessons:
B-01 Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
D-21 Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH).
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli.
G-01 Review records and available data at the outset of the case.
G-02 Consider biological/medical variables that may be affecting the client.
G-03 Conduct a preliminary assessment of the client in order to identify the referral problem.
G-04 Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-05 Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
G-06 Provide behavior-analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients
G-08 Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
I-02 Define environmental variables in observable and measurable terms.
I-03 Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
I-04 Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-02 Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
J-04 Select intervention strategies based on client preferences.
J-05 Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-08 Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-05 Design and use systems for monitoring procedural integrity.
K-06 Provide supervision for behavior-change agents.
K-07 Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program.
K-09 Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.
FK-13 reflexive relations (US-UR)
FK-14 respondent conditioning (CS-CR)
FK-15 operant conditioning
FK-24 Stimulus control 
FK-26 unconditioned motivating operation
FK-31 behavioral contingencies
FK-33 functional relations

Notes: