Segment 1 – Group Supervision Meeting Agenda
Meeting Topic: Introduction to Applied Behavior Analysis

Segment 1 Task List Items: 
B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature
FK-08: Distinguish between radical and methodological behaviorism
FK-09: Distinguish among the conceptual analysis of behavior, experimental analysis of behavior, applied behavior analysis, and behavioral service delivery.
FK-07: Environmental (as opposed to mentalistic) explanations of behavior).
FK-10: Behavior, response, response class
FK-11: Environment, stimulus, stimulus class.FK-33: Functional relations

1. Housekeeping 
Take attendance for the meeting.
State the duration of today’s meeting (90 minutes).
Distribute BACB® experience forms to supervisees. 
Provide an overview of how supervision works
Provide an overview of materials needed for supervision.
2. Assign Practice Homework
Homework assignment #1 is to “Complete “bio” questions on TrainABA.com and email answers to supervisor
Homework assignment # 2 is to complete the “self-assessment on personal 4th edition task list” via TrainABA.com and submit this document to supervisor 
Explain presentation requirement. Have supervisees sign up on presentation calendar. 
Give them presentation topic list
Model positive feedback using anecdote 
Model corrective feedback using anecdote
Identify potential teaching moments within the context of presentations and provide appropriate feedback as needed.
3. Task List Discussion
Read assessment procedure at start of Assessment chapter
4. Task List Lesson 
Discuss task list item B-01: Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
Discuss task list item FK-08: Distinguish between radical and methodological behaviorism.
Discuss task litem item FK-09: Distinguish among the conceptual analysis of behavior, experimental analysis of behavior, applied behavior analysis, and behavioral service delivery.
Discuss task litem item FK-07: Environmental (as opposed to mentalistic) explanations of behavior).
Discuss task litem item FK-33: Functional relations.
Discuss task litem item FK-10: Behavior, response, response class.
Discuss task litem item FK-11: Environment, stimulus, stimulus class.
5.  Homework Review
Discuss homework policies and expectations for completion of assignments.
6. Questions
Answer any questions related to the homework or topics discussed. 
7. Closing Notes
Close the meeting by inviting supervisees to request topics to be covered in upcoming meetings. 
