A - 10 DESIGN, PLOT, AND INTERPRET DATA USING EQUAL-INTERVAL GRAPHS

Definition:
“In applied behavior analysis, each point on a line graph shows the level of some quantifiable dimension of the target behavior (i.e. the dependent variable) in relation to a specified point in time and/or environmental condition.” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, p. 129)*

The behavior analyst defines behavior in quantifiable, observable terms to measure consistently and accurately. The behavior is measured in terms of a pertinent aspect of behavior that can be counted or assessed across observers. When data are plotted, the patterns they make provide for a visual analysis of levels of the behavior (shown on the vertical, y-axis) as the behavior occurs at a specific point in time or environmental condition (shown on a horizontal, x-axis). Graphs are drawn with the y-axis in a two-thirds ratio to the x-axis in order to enable accurate comparison of intervention results across graphs. The analysis interprets levels of data points, directions (trend), and stability or variability of data paths within a single condition or viewed across different conditions. These factors help an analyst assess if an individual is responding to intervention efforts in a therapeutic or non-therapeutic direction. As a result of this systematic interpretation of results, the analyst continues treatment strategies or alters them until the line graph shows consistent behavior change in a therapeutic direction.

Examples:
Designing an equal interval line graph (Cooper, et al., 2007, pp 144-149) with example of visual analysis of data within and across conditions*:
Approximate ratio of y to x-axis is 2:3
The target behavior to measure was the percent (dimension) of math homework (varied number of problems assigned) a student completed each morning when math homework was assigned (session). Lowest possible percent of homework completed was zero and highest possible percent (100 %) is shown at equal intervals of outside tick parks. Before intervention began, John showed a baseline pattern of completing between zero and 10% of his assigned math homework. Zero value is raised above the x-axis to see data points clearly.
Baseline lasted 4 sessions in a non-therapeutic pattern. Conditions changed from baseline to intervention between Session 4 and 5. The intervention included John’s teacher praising him each day that he returned any part of his math homework assigned. In the first session of intervention, John turned in 10% of his homework. The second day after receiving teacher praise, John increased his completed amount of homework to 40% of the assignment. John did not always increase the percent of homework completed each day that math homework was given. The intervention data path shows an increasing trend overall throughout the intervention condition of teacher praise for math homework completion. Although data showed some variability, John reached criteria of at least 90% of math homework completed for 3 consecutive days on the 12th day of teacher praise for his efforts to return homework.
Figure 2 – Percent of daily math homework John completed in September
*AB designs can show relations between baseline and intervention responding but cannot be used to show cause and effect.

Write another example:













Questions to ask your supervisor: 











Relevant Literature:
Alberto, P. A., & Troutman, A. C. (2012). Applied behavior analysis for teachers. Pearson Higher Ed.American Psychological Association, 2010.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson: Prentice Hall.
Gast, D. L., & Ledford, J. R. (Eds.). (2010). Single subject research methodology in behavioral sciences. Routledge. 
Vanselow, N. R., & Bourret, J. C. (2012). Online Interactive Tutorials for Creating Graphs with Excel 2007 or 2010. Behavior analysis in practice, 5(1), 40.

Related Lessons: 
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
H-02 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
FK-47 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g. rate, duration, latency, interresponse time)
J-15 Base decision-making on data displayed in various formats.

Notes:
