B – 04 USE WITHDRAWAL/REVERSAL DESIGNS. 

Definition (Withdrawal Design): 











 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Reversal Design): 











 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Footnotes:
Some authors exclusively use the term reversal design for studies in which the contingency is reversed  (or switched to another behavior) as in DRO and DRA/DRI reversal techniques and the term withdrawal design for studies that employ an A-B-A-B approach where the A signifies baseline condition and B the treatment condition (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 

A multiple treatment reversal design can also be used to compare the effects of two or more treatment conditions to baseline and/or to the other treatments (e.g., ABABACAC, ABABCBCB) (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).

Example: 
An experiment that entails exposing a participant to a condition of no programmed reinforcement for a work task (baseline) until steady state is achieved, then exposes a participate to a condition in which they earn stickers contingent on a work task (intervention) and then repeats these two conditions respectively. 

An experiment in which baseline consists of the reinforcement of challenging behavior and the treatment consists of differential reinforcement of an alternative/replacement behavior and both conditions are replicated at least twice. 

Write another example: 















Questions to ask your supervisor:















Relevant Literature: 
Anderson, C. M., & Long, E. S. (2002). Use of a structured descriptive assessment methodology to identify variables affecting problem behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 35(2), 137-154.
Baer, D. M., & Wolf, M. M. (1970). Recent examples of behavior modification in preschool settings. Behavior modification in clinical psychology, 5-12.           
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River NJ: Pearson.
Falcomata, T. S., Roane, H. S., Hovanetz, A. N., Kettering, T. L., & Keeney, K. M. (2004). An evaluation of response cost in the treatment of inappropriate vocalizations maintained by automatic reinforcement. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37(1), 83-87.
Lerman, D. C., Kelley, M. E., Vorndran, C. M., Kuhn, S. A., & LaRue, R. H. (2002). Reinforcement magnitude and responding during treatment with differential reinforcement. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 35(1), 29-48.

Related Lessons: 
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables 
J-09 Identify and address practical and ethical considerations when using experimental designs to demonstrate treatment effectiveness.

Notes: