B – 08 USE MULTIPLE PROBE DESIGNS.

Definition (Multiple Probe Design): 












 (Gast & Spriggs, 2010). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Example: 
Multiple probe designs are particularly useful for researchers and teachers in educational settings to efficiently demonstrate results of instructional interventions when teaching across functionally different new skills (behaviors), across multiple students (participants), or across different sets of skills (conditions).

Multiple probe designs might not be appropriate if assessing the effects of intervention on severe behaviors that result in injury or property destruction because of the requirement that intervention be delayed across each tier while a person continues to engage in severe behaviors with lasting consequences.

Write another example:





















Questions to ask your supervisor: 























Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.  
Gast, D. L., & Spriggs, A. D. (2010). Visual analysis of graphic data. In D. L. Gast (Ed.), Single subject research methodology in behavioral sciences. New York: Routledge.
Horner, R. D., & Baer, D. M. (1978). Multiple-probe technique: A variation of the multiple baseline. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11(1), 189-196.
Thompson, T. J., Braam, S. J., & Fuqua, R. W. (1982). Training and generalization of laundry skills: A multiple probe evaluation with handicapped persons. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 15(1), 177-182.

Related Lessons: 
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
B-07 Use multiple baselines designs.
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording. 
H-02 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
FK-36 response generalization

Notes:
