G-06 PROVIDE BEHAVIOR ANALYTIC SERVICES IN COLLABORATION WITH OTHERS WHO SUPPORT AND/OR PROVIDE SERVICES TO ONE'S CLIENTS.

Content area 2.03 (a) (Behavior Analysts’ Responsibility to Clients) of the professional and ethical compliance code for behavior analysts states that, “When indicated and professionally appropriate, behavior analysts cooperate with other professionals, in a manner that is consistent with the philosophical assumptions and principles of behavior analysis, in order to effectively and appropriately serve their clients.” In other words, it is our ethical responsibility to collaborate and communicate with all service providers and other individual stakeholders if it will best service our clients.

Example: 
Mary has been exhibiting aggression during sessions with her occupational therapist whenever a novel task is presented. The BCBA has come up with a general behavior support plan for all staff working with Mary to decrease these behaviors. The plan involves multiple options that all are relevant to the addressing the function of the aggression. The BCBA sets up a training to discuss and explain the proper implementation of these intervention strategies, and get feedback from other service providers such as the occupational therapist to increase the social validity of the treatment and increase the likelihood of treatment fidelity.

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:














Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 641-642, 675-676.
Kelly, A. & Tincani, M. (2013). Collaborative training and practice among applied behavior analysts who support individuals with autism spectrum disorder, Education and Training in Autism and Developmental Disabilities. 48, 1, 120-131.
Professional and Ethical Compliance Code for Behavior Analysts. Copyright © 2014 by the Behavior Analysis Certification Board®, Inc. (“BACB”), all rights reserved. (Content list items 2.02-2.03).

Related Lessons:
G-04: Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-07: Practice within one’s limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, training, or make referrals as necessary.
G-08: Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
I-06: Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased. 
J-11: Program for stimulus and response generalization.
J-14: Arrange instructional procedures to promote generative learning (i.e., derived relations).
K-03: Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-08: Establish support for behavior-analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.


Notes
