Segment 24 – Group Supervision Meeting Agenda
Meeting Topic: Supervision II

Task List Items Reviewed:
G-05: Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
G-06: Provide behavior analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
G-07: Practice within one’s of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, training, or make referrals as necessary.
K-08: Establish support for behavior analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environment.

1. Housekeeping 
Upon entry to meeting have supervisees hand in the previous week’s homework assignment and discuss several “Housekeeping Items” related to supervision.
Take attendance for the meeting.
State the duration of today’s meeting (90 minutes).
Distribute BACB® experience forms to supervisees. 
2. Task List Lesson and Discussion
Discuss task list item G-05: Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms
Discuss task list item G-06: Provide behavior analytic services in collaboration with others who support and/or provide services to one’s clients.
Discuss task list item G-07: Practice within one’s of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, training, or make referrals as necessary.
Discuss task list item K-08: Establish support for behavior analytic services from direct and indirect consumers.
Discuss task list item K-09: Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environment.
3.  Homework Review
Review homework that was assigned at the previous supervision meeting.
4. Questions
Answer any questions related to the homework or topics discussed. 
5. Closing Notes
Assign Homework (task list boxes, presentation) from today’s segment, due at next group meeting
Close the meeting by inviting supervisees to request topics to be covered in upcoming meetings. 