FK-07 ENVIRONMENTAL (AS OPPOSED TO MENTALISTIC) EXPLANATIONS OF BEHAVIOR.

Definition (Mentalism)

(Cooper, Heron, Heward, 2007, p. 699).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?

An environmental explanation of behavior can be described by physical events in the phylogenetic or ontogenetic history of the organism that cause behavior to occur. A behavior analyst believes that all behavior is a result of these physical events and that there is no reason to believe that there are some causes of behavior outside of physical dimensions.

It can be difficult sometimes, as we learn behavior analysis, to describe behavior without the use of mentalistic explanations (e.g., the hit me because he’s frustrated). This is because in non-behavior analytic cultures, where many behavior analysts spend most of their lives, behavior is described this way and there is reinforcement available from that verbal community to perpetuate mentalistic explanations of behavior. For instance, it is common for people to believe that we each are responsible for our own actions and that the choices we make are done so with “free-will”.  Johnston (2014) mentions that, “After a lifetime of explaining behavior in terms of such apparent freedom, it is understandably difficult to accept what appears to be a helpless or passive role…” (p.5) 

Much of behavior in society is controlled by consequences. Johnston (2014) says “…we assign the responsibility for behavior not to the individual but to sources of control in the physical environment. From this perspective, holding individuals responsible for their behavior by specifying the consequences for certain actions remains an important contingency because it helps manage those tendencies to act in one way or another” (p.11).

Examples:
Larry was inattentive during group rug activities in the classroom. His teacher did not know how to get through to him and tried everything to get him to pay attention and access the curriculum. This teacher thought he might have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and mentioned this to the parents. After this meeting, the team chairperson asked for the behavior analysts to help in getting Larry to attend and focus. They wanted to do this to see if some simple environmental accommodations may help increase attending before recommending any treatment based on potential ADHD symptoms. After several observations, the behavior analyst noticed that Larry was always sitting towards the back of the rug with other students who were very talkative and distracting. The behavior analyst recommended moving Larry to the front of the room next to the teacher for rug activities to see if those would help attending. After a week, Larry was focusing more, attentive during groups, and not distracted by the students in the back. 

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L.  (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Emotion. In Science and human behavior (pp.160-170). New York: Macmillan.

Related Lessons:
B-01 Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
G-04 Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-05 Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
I-01 Define behavior in observable and measurable terms.
I-02 Define environmental variables in observable and measurable terms.
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly.
FK-01 Lawfulness of behavior
FK-03 Determinism
FK-07 Environmental (as opposed to mentalistic) explanations of behavior

Notes:
