FK-08 DISTINGUISH BETWEEN RADICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL BEHAVIORISM.
	
Definition (Radical behaviorism): 




(Skinner, 1989).
Flashcard created?			
Learned to fluency?

Definition (Methodological behaviorism): 




(Moore, 2008).
Flashcard created?			
Learned to fluency?

Examples:
The distinction between radical and methodological behaviorism can be summed up by the views on private events. Private events, or events observable by only the individual engaging in the response, are not included in the analysis of behavior by a methodological behaviorist position. Radical behaviorists consider private events to be no different than any other behavior, therefore, allowing it to be understood within the same conceptual framework understood for overt behavior.

Write another example:





Questions to ask your supervisor:






Relevant Literature:
Baum, W. M. (2011). What is radical behaviorism? A review of Jay Moore's Conceptual Foundations of Radical Behaviorism. Journal of the experimental analysis of behavior, 95(1), 119-126.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. 
Moore, J. (2011). A review of Baum's review of Conceptual Foundations of Radical Behaviorism. Journal of the experimental analysis of behavior, 95(1), 127-140.
Moore, J. (2009). Why the radical behaviorist conception of private events is interesting, relevant, and important. Behavior and Philosophy, 21-37.
Moore, Jay (2008). Conceptual Foundations of Radical Behaviorism. Sloan Pub.
Skinner, B. F. (1989). Recent issues in the analysis of behavior. Prentice Hall. Chicago.

Related Lessons:
B-01 Use the dimensions of applied behavior analysis (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968) to evaluate whether interventions are behavior analytic in nature.
G-04 Explain behavioral concepts using nontechnical language.
G-05 Describe and explain behavior, including private events, in behavior-analytic (non-mentalistic) terms.
FK-01 Lawfulness of behavior
FK-07 Environmental (as opposed to mentalistic) explanations of behavior

Notes:
