FK-33 functional relations.

Definition (Functional relation): 


 

(Johnston & Pennypacker, 2009).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?


Definition (Functional relation): 




(Skinner, 1953).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?




Definition (Functional relation): 


 


(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created?
Learned to fluency?


Example: 
Sonny has been engaging in some eloping behavior within a school building.  He has been known to leave his classroom area and to run to other rooms within the building. His teachers have started delivering small pieces of candy for on-task behavior, as he works on his schoolwork. The teachers have started seeing an increase in on-task behavior and a decrease in elopement. A substitute teacher came into the classroom for a week but did not know about the on-task candy delivery the first couple of days.   Sonny started eloping again. When the aides told the substitute teacher about the contingency for on-task behavior, the substitute started delivering the candy on the same schedule as the other teacher. Sonny again started sitting down, remaining on task, and elopement decreased. It can be said that there is likely a functional relation between the schedule of candy delivery and the elopement and/or on-task behavior.

Three semi-busy 3-way intersections in the small town of Passamaquoddy has had a series of accidents over the past few years.  These intersections have had yield signs up but there have been several accidents at each location.  The town decides to replace the yield signs with 3 stop signs instead. They use a multiple baseline design across locations. After seeing that when, and only when, the new stop signs are implemented, accidents have decreased in that location. It can be said that there is a functional relation between the placement of the stop signs and the change in accidents reported there.  

Non-Example: 
A child with autism has been engaging in some eloping behavior within a school building.  He has been known to leave his classroom area and to run to other rooms within the building. His teachers have explained to him that the other rooms are off limits but this has not had an impact on his behavior nor has simply ensuring that the doors are closed. His teacher decides to put up a green light on rooms that it is o.k. to enter.  There has been no change in behavior from the previously recorded levels of entering the off-limits classrooms.  It can be said that there is no functional relation between the presence of green light signs and the off-limits classroom entering behavior.

Write another example:




Questions to ask your supervisor:




Relevant Literature: 
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (2009). Strategies and tactics of behavioral research. Routledge.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. Simon and Schuster.

Related Lessons:
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
FK-33 functional relations
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
H-05 Evaluate temporal relations between observed variables (within &between sessions, time series).
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data

Notes:
