D-09 use the verbal operants as a basis for langauge assessment.

Definition:
In the field of applied behavior analysis extensive research has been done on the development of verbal behavior.  
“Verbal behavior involves social interactions between speakers and listeners, whereby speakers gain access to reinforcement and control their environment through the behavior of listeners” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). Verbal operants are the basic units of this exchange.  
In 1957 B.F. Skinner identified six elementary verbal operants in his book on Verbal Behavior.  These included mands, tacts, intraverbals, echoics, textuals, and transcription.  “Skinner’s analysis suggests that a complete verbal repertoire is composed of each of the different elementary operants, and separate speaker and listener repertoires” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).   
Since Skinner described these operants, those in the field have applied these concepts to both language assessment and training.  In order to evaluate whether or not specific language training is necessary, a variety of standardized tools have been used to test an individual’s receptive and expressive language abilities.  
Although these tests provide some good information, they may fail to identify deficits in one or more of the six verbal operant areas. Some children who may be proficient in tacting (such as labeling things in their environment such as letters and numbers) may fail to make appropriate mands for desired items (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007).  In this case it is important for behavior analysts to use a combination of approaches or less standardized methods to assess these needs.  It may be helpful to observe the individual in their natural environment and take data on their verbal interactions.  

Ask questions such as:
What is the frequency of and complexity of mands?
What it the frequency and complexity of tacting behavior?
Will the child or individual demonstrate echoic behavior when prompted?
Does the child or individual engage in intraverbal behavior with known caregivers?
Can or will the child or individual read words that are written down for him?
Can or will the child or individual write down words that are said to him?  

Example:
Tact: labeling things in their environment such as letters and numbers.
Standardized assessments of verbal behavior include but are not limited to: the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test III (Dunn & Dunn, 1997), the Comprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test (Hammill & Newcomer, 1997), the Assessment of Basic Language and Learning Skills (ABLLS) (Partington & Sundberg, 1998), the Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program (VB-MAPP) and the CELF-4 (Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 2003).  

Write another example: 












Questions to ask your supervisor:











Relevant Literature:
Cooper J.O., Heron T.E., Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Hammill, D., & Newcomer, P.L. (1997).  Test of language development-3.  Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
Partington, J. W., & Sundberg, M. L. (1998). Assessment of basic language and learning skills. (The ABLLS):  an assessment for language delayed students. Pleasant Hill, CA: Behavior Analysts, Inc.
Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. A. (2003). Clinical evaluation of language fundamentals, fourth edition (CELF-4). Toronto, Canada: The Psychological Corporation/A Harcourt Assessment Company.
Skinner, B.F. (1957). Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century.
Sundberg, M. L. (2008) Verbal behavior milestones assessment and placement program: The VB-MAPP. Concord, CA: AVB Press.
Sundberg, M.L.  & Partington, J.W. (1998).  Teaching language to children with autism or other developmental disabilities.  Pleasant Hill, CA:  Behavior Analysts, Inc.  

Related Lessons:
D-10 Use echoic training.
D-11 Use mand training. 
D-12 Use tact training.
D-13 Use intraverbal training. 
D-14 Use listener training.
FK-43 Echoics
FK-44 Mands
FK-45 Tacts
FK-46 Intraverbals

Notes: