D-11 use mand training.

Definition:
Mands are important in the development of language in children. The development of a mands allows an individual to communicate their wants and needs, including basic needs such as food and water, to those around them.  When an early learner fails to develop a mand repertoire, they may not be able to effectively communicate with others and may not be able to access these reinforcers.  This can lead to frustration, learned helplessness, or a variety of other maladaptive behaviors such aggression, self-injurious behavior social withdrawal or tantrums (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).

When mands fail to develop typically, it is crucial begin language training.   Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007) suggest teaching mands before all other types of verbal behavior as manding allows an individual to gain access to their wants and needs. During early training a variety of mands should be taught so that the child learns to differentiate their response based on their current needs and MO. Instructors should focus on teaching bids for edibles and tangibles before making other requests.   Sundberg & Partington (1998) suggest that teachers should use a combination of “prompting, fading and differential reinforcement to transfer control from stimulus variables to motivative variables” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  It is important that both the echoic prompt and the non-verbal stimulus be faded out for mand training to be effective.  

When using mand training:
Establish a likely MO (motivating operation).  This may be done formally through preference assessment procedures or more informally through observations or caregiver report.  It is important that a child be motivated to make a request for mand training to be effective.  

Note: It may be helpful to ensure that a reinforcer has been withheld prior to training to ensure that it is potent.  For instance a child who has just recently eaten is not as likely to be motivated to request food.  
Enrich the environment with potential reinforcers (things that the child generally seems to prefer such as foods and toys). 
Wait for the child to initiate or show interest in the non-verbal stimulus (the child reaches for an item, emits some sort of vocalization, points to it, etc.). 
Use an echoic prompt to label the non-verbal stimulus.  Successively reinforce closer and closer approximations to the target verbal response and follow with specific reinforcement (the requested item).  
Once the client is able to imitate the verbal model in the presence of the stimulus, gradually fade out the echoic prompt to establish the response “under the multiple control of the MO and the nonverbal stimulus” Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).  
Finally the presentation of the non-verbal stimulus should also be faded out so that the response is only under the control of the MO.  This helps to ensure that the individual can make the request regardless of whether or not the item is physically present within the environment. 
Gradually increase the verbal requirement over time so that the child is making more complex and specific requests (“I want the chocolate cookie.”).

Example:
Rachel wants a cookie, but does not know how to ask. So instead she has a long tantrum and screams, “cookie, cookie, cookie”. This goes on for several days, so her teacher’s decide to train her on how to ask for a cookie appropriately instead of engaging in tantrum behavior. 

Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor:













Relevant Literature:
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Drash, P. W., High, R. L., & Tudor, R. M. (1999). Using mand training to establish an echoic repertoire in young children with autism. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 16, 29–44.
Skinner, B.F. (1957). Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century.
Sundberg, M. L., Loeb, M., Hail, L., & Eigenheer, P. (2002). Contriving establishing operations to teach mands for information. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 18, 14-28
Sundberg, M.L., & Partington, J.W. (1998). Teaching language to children with autism or other developmental disabilities.  Pleasant Hill, CA:  Behavior Analysts, Inc.

Related Lessons:
FK-44 Mands

Notes: