D-12 use tact training.

Definition:
Practitioners may use a variety of techniques to teach language when working with clients.  Tact training is one such technique in which a consumer may be taught to label “objects, actions, properties of objects and actions, prepositional relations, abstractions, private events, and so on”  (Cooper, Howard, & Heron, 2007). “The goal of teaching is to bring a verbal response under nonverbal stimulus control”  (Cooper, Howard, & Heron, 2007). 

When using tact training:
Ensure that the listener is attending.  Make sure that they are looking in your direction, are making eye contact and that the environment isn’t too noisy or distracting.
Pair the presentation of nonverbal stimulus that you would like to train with an echoic model.  
Pause to allow the listener to process the information and wait for a response.
Provide differential reinforcement for responses that are closer and closer approximations to the verbal model.

Note:  It may be difficult to differentially reinforce the tacting of events that cannot be shared by both instructor and student, such as private events like pain, as the instructor may not be able to adequately able to label them (Cooper, Howard, & Heron, 2007).  For this reason it is recommended that initial tact training be done with objects or actions that can be directly observed.

Once the client is able to imitate the verbal model in the presence of the stimulus, gradually fade out the verbal model so that only the stimulus itself sets the occasion for the response. 

Example: 
Initially a practitioner pairs a nonverbal stimulus (such as snow falling outside of one’s window) with an echoic model “snow.”  The imitation of this verbal model is differentially reinforced.  Over time this echoic is faded out so that only the presence of the nonverbal stimulus (the snow) sets the occasion for the consumer to label “snow” in the absence of a verbal model. A time delay procedure, in which the practitioner gradually delays the presentation of the echoic model after the nonverbal stimulus appears, may be helpful in fading out the verbal model.  

Notes:





Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:





















Relevant Literature: 
Cooper J.O., Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2007).  Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Skinner, B.F. (1957). Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century.
Sundberg, M. L., & Michael, J. (2001). The value of Skinner’s analysis of verbal behavior for teaching children with autism. Behavior Modification, 25, 698-724.
Sundberg, M.L., & Partington, J.W. (1998). Teaching language to children with autism or other developmental disabilities.  Pleasant Hill, CA:  Behavior Analysts, Inc.

Related Lessons: 
D-12 Use Tact Training
FK-45 Tacts

Notes: