D-18 use extinction.

Definition: 
As a behavioral intervention, extinction “involves eliminating the reinforcement contingency maintaining a response” and has “been used successfully to reduce the frequency of a variety of behavioral disorders” (Lerman & Iwata, 1995). To use extinction effectively, behavioral analysts must first determine the reinforcer maintaining an individual’s behavior. Once the reinforcer is determined, extinction can be utilized by preventing the behavior from achieving the same function, thereby rendering the behavior ineffective at producing reinforcement. There are three common procedures for extinction: extinction of behavior maintained by positive reinforcement, extinction of behavior maintained by negative reinforcement and extinction of behavior maintained by automatic reinforcement. 

While often effective when used correctly, extinction may produce unwanted side effects. These include extinction bursts, initial increases in target behavior as the individual engages in an increased rate of behavior to access previous reinforcers and extinction-induced aggression.  Also, you may see an increase in unwanted novel behavior. To be effective, it is crucial to withhold all reinforcers maintaining the problem behavior and to provide frequent opportunities for the individual’s behavior to contact new reinforcement contingencies (e.g. problem behavior no longer produces reinforcement while replacement behavior produces does produce reinforcement). This may not always be feasible (e.g. If an individual engages in aggression to gain attention from others, even response blocking may sufficiently reinforce this behavior).  It is often not advised for use in environments when problem behaviors are likely to be imitated by others (e.g. in classroom settings), when harm to the individual or others cannot be prevented such as with severe aggression or self-injury and when behaviors are too disruptive to others or occur at high frequencies and cannot be managed effectively.

Extinction should also not be used as singular intervention. When coupled with differential reinforcement strategies, studies have shown the unwanted effects of extinction can be reduced significantly (Athens & Vollmer, 2010).

Example: 
Teaching an individual an appropriate means to gain attention while putting inappropriate attention-seeking behavior on extinction allows the individual to gain access to previous reinforcers, thereby mitigating the aversive effects of extinction. 


Write another example:














Questions to ask your supervisor:














Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lerman, D.C., & Iwata, B.A., (1995). Prevalence of the extinction burst and its attenuation during treatment. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 28(1), 93-94.
Athen, E.S., & Vollmer, T.R., (2010). An investigation of differential reinforcement of alternative behavior without extinction. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 43(4), 569-589. 

Related Lessons: 
C-03 State and plan for unwanted effects of extinction
D-18. Use Extinction.
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints
J-09 Identify and address practical and ethical considerations when using experimental designs to demonstrate program effectiveness.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased. 
Notes: