G-08 identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.

“Behavior analysis is a science of studying how we can arrange our environments so they make very likely the behaviors we want to be probably enough, and they make unlikely the behaviors we want to be improbable” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 15). The behavior analyst assesses the nature of the fit between an individual and the environment in which he/she functions using a three-part contingency (antecedent, behavior, consequences) structure of events. In this process, the analyst identifies motivating operations associated with antecedent events and the consequences that maintain problem behaviors or prevent adequate development of adaptive behaviors. This information can be used to identify relatively uncomplicated proactive environmental changes that will improve the functioning of the individual. As a result of the individual’s increased access to positive reinforcement, more intrusive behavior interventions may be less necessary. 

Examples:
Parents found it difficult to get their daughter ready for the school bus on time. They decided they would try giving her time to shower at night instead of in the morning. They added showering to her regular nighttime routine and the daughter not only got to the school bus on-time but began to go to sleep earlier after the expanded nighttime routine.
A student refused to sit in his seat at school. An occupational therapist suggested a gel filled wedge for the student’s chair and the student not only remained seated in one class, but chose to use the wedge in all of his classes.

Write another example:
























Questions to ask your supervisor: 




















Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall.

Related Lessons:
B-02 Review and interpret articles from the behavior-analytic literature.
D-21 Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH).
E-01 Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli.
E-03 Use instructions and rules.
I-03 Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased, or decreased.
J-04 Select intervention strategies based on client preferences.
J-05 Select intervention strategies based on the client’s current repertoires.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-08 Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
J-12 Program for maintenance.
K-09 Secure the support of others to maintain the client’s behavioral repertoires in their natural environments.
FK-05 Parsimony
FK-06 Pragmatism
FK-23 automatic reinforcement and punishment
FK-26 unconditioned motivating operation
FK-33 functional relations

Notes: