J-09 identify and address practical and ethical consideratons when using expeimental designs to demonstrate treatment effectiveness.

The general goal of behavioral research is “to demonstrate that measured changes in the target behavior occur because of experimentally manipulated changes in the environment” (Cooper, 2007, p. 160). Without a controlled research design, practitioners cannot claim a causal relation between intervention and behavior change. Practical and ethical concerns limit practitioner’s use of experimental designs in most settings. Typical risks associated with controlled research include the need to delay treatment while collecting baseline data or to withdraw interventions that are successful. Each research design has specific risks to participants associated with its application. In applied practice, meaningful, socially valid, and lasting change is the goal. Clients, parents, staff, and teachers prefer the most efficient and effective path toward treatment goals. For such reasons, practitioners seek to show evidence of a correlation rather than a causal relation between changes in a client’s behavior and an intervention by providing comparison of patterns of baseline (A) and intervention (B) responding over time. The AB design has poor experimental control but strong practical and ethical value in natural settings.

Examples:
A researcher-practitioner designed a multiple baseline study for a woman who hit and scratched herself. The researcher’s review of the first three days of baseline data showed that occurrences of the behavior were highly variable without an obvious pattern of responding. The researcher concluded that further delay of treatment that might decrease a dangerous behavior was not ethical. The researcher knew that the strength of the results of his research would be threatened if he began treatment before he had a clear pattern in baseline responding, but his responsibility to his client, and those close to her, was his primary concern. He regretted not anticipating this possibility by choosing a research design that could have demonstrated experimental control without depending on highly stable baseline responding.

A student’s teacher did not want the student to participate in a graduate intern’s study because the intern planned to work with the student during classroom reading instruction. Even though the research study was designed to provide a benefit to the student by increasing sight-word reading, the boy’s parent refused to sign permission for his participation. The intern realized that social validity was threatened by his original plan and he would have to arrange to work with the student after school or exclude him from the study.


Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor:












\

Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Gast, D. L. (2010). Single subject research methodology in behavioral sciences. New York: NY: Routledge.

Related Lessons:
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
G-08 Identify and make environmental changes that reduce the need for behavior analysis services.
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
J-02 Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence. 
06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
J-08 Select intervention strategies based on the social validity of the intervention.
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased.
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly.
K-07 Evaluate the effectiveness of the behavioral program

Notes: