J-15 BASE DECISION MAKING ON DATA DISPLAYED IN VARIOUS FORMATS.

Behavior analysts make decisions during assessment and intervention based on data. Graphic displays (e.g., line graphs, bar graphs, and cumulative graphs) aid accurate and efficient interpretation of quantitative data and facilitate communication with others. “The primary function of a graph is to communicate without assistance from the accompanying text” (Spriggs & Gast, 2010, p. 167). Line graphs are most often used by behavior analysts to show effects and possible functional relations between intervention (independent variable) and a defined behavior (dependent variable). Bar graphs are often used by behavior analysts to summarize or compare discrete aspects of recorded behavior. Cumulative graphs show the rate of change in responding across time. Although they may be used with duration or latency data, they are most often used to show frequency data. Behavior analysts often use tables to summarize data or other information. “An informative table supplements—rather than duplicates—the text” (APA, 2010). As with graphs, a table should communicate efficiently but include enough information to be understood alone without explanations in the text.

Examples:
A behavior analyst interprets the effectiveness of a constant time delay procedure for teaching a student 10 sight words using the following line graph: 

A behavior analyst uses a table to summarize the number of times a child chose a specific toy during seven sessions of free-play with four toys available. 





Example 2 data display:  
Ask supervisee to interpret information in the table to decide which toys she would place in a free time area for this child to enjoy. 
Would you consider adding different types of any one toy to the playtime area based on these data? 
If so, which type? If not, why not? 
Write a title for this table. 



Questions to ask your supervisor:











Write another example:





















Relevant Literature:
American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Spriggs, A. D., & Gast, D. L. (2010). Visual representation of data. In D. L. Gast (Ed.), Single subject research methodology in behavioral sciences (pp 166-198). New York, NY: Routledge.

Related Lessons:
A-10 Design, plot, and interpret data using equal-interval graphs.
A-11 Design, plot, and interpret data using a cumulative record to display data.
A-12 Design and implement continuous measurement procedures (e.g., event recording).
A-14 Design and implement choice measures.
B-03 Systematically arrange independent variables to demonstrate their effects on dependent variables.
H-01 Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
H-03 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability.
I-05 Organize, analyze, and interpret observed data.
I-07 Design and conduct preference assessments to identify putative reinforcers.
J-01 State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms.
K-04 Design and use effective performance monitoring and reinforcement systems.
FK-33 functional relations

Notes:
