D-10 use echoic training.

Definition:
Echoics are units of verbal behavior that are, “evoked by a verbal discriminative stimulus that has point-to point correspondence and formal similarity with the response” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2014).  Repeating words, phrases, or other auditory verbal units is common for all speakers in day-to-day speech (Sundberg, 2008).

Echoic training, sometimes referred to as vocal imitation training, is a procedure in which a caregiver or teacher emits a sound and a listener echoes or repeats what has been said (Skinner, 1957).  Reinforcement (either social, tangible or other) is often delivered after the correct utterance is given.  
When using echoic training, the trainer should:
1. Deliver the verbal discriminative stimulus (the word, sound or phrase you intend them to repeat).
2. Provide positive reinforcement for responses that have point-to-point similarity to the target response.  

Examples:
Echoic training can be used to teach a variety of skills such as:
Mands-such as when you give a child a full verbal model of the appropriate way to ask for another cup of milk “I want milk” and he repeats this phrase.
Tacts- such as telling a classroom full of Spanish students that the word for dog is “perro” and asking them to repeat this word back to you.
Intraverbal behavior- such as an elementary school teaching modeling the fill in of the word “star” after saying “Twinkle, twinkle little ______” and pausing.

Write another example:



















Relevant Literature:
Drash, P. W., High, R. L., & Tudor, R. M. (1999). Using mand training to establish an echoic repertoire in young children with autism. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 16, 29–44.
Cooper J.O, Heron T.E, Heward W.L. (2014).  Applied behavior analysis.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Kodak, T., & Clements, A. (2009). Acquisition of Mands and Tacts with Concurrent Echoic Training.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 42(4), 839–843.
Mirenda, P. (2008). A Comparison of Stimulus-Stimulus Pairing, Standard Echoic Training, and Control Procedures on the Vocal Behavior of Children with Autism. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 24(1), 123–133.
Sundberg, M. L. (2008). Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program. Concorde, CA: AVB Press
Skinner, B.F. (1957). Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century 

Related Lessons:
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement.
D-04 Use modeling and imitation training.
FK-43 Echoics

Notes:


Questions to ask your supervisor: