D-16 USE POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE PUNISHMENT.

Definitions
Punishment: "Occurs when stimulus change immediately follows a response and decreases the future frequency of that type of behavior in similar conditions.”  (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007)

Positive Punishment: "A behavior is followed immediately by the presentation of a stimulus that decreases the future frequency of the behavior.”  (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007)*

Negative Punishment:  "A…behavior is followed immediately by the removal of a stimulus (or a decrease in the intensity of the stimulus), that decreases the future frequency of similar responses under similar conditions." (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007).

Footnotes
Alternatively Fox (1982) described positive and negative punishment as Type I punishment (contingent stimulation) and Type II punishment (contingent withdrawal of a stimulus).
An emphasis on the ethical considerations of using punishment should be introduced when punishment is first discussed.

Example:
Albert is learning to drive.  Albert drives fast and speeds along the highway.  His mother provides a firm reprimand directly following the speeding.  Albert no longer speeds when his mother is in the car. 

Write another example:











Questions to ask your supervisor:












Relevant Literature:  
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts: 2nd Expanded Edition. Taylor & Francis.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. (2nd Ed.) Pearson Prentice Hall.
Foxx, R. M. (1982). Decreasing behaviors of severely retarded and autistic persons. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Houten, R., Axelrod, S., Bailey, J. S., Favell, J. E., Foxx, R. M., Iwata, B. A., & Lovaas, O. I. (1988).  The right to effective behavioral treatment.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 21(4), 381-384.

Related Lessons:
D-01 Use positive and negative reinforcement
D-17 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of punishment
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction
E-11 Use pairing procedures to establish new conditioned reinforcers and punishers
G-07 Practice within one's limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, and training, or make referrals as necessary
J-10 When a behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased
FK-19 Unconditioned punishment
FK 20 Conditioned punishment

Notes:
