D-17 USE APPROPRIATE PARAMETERS AND SCHEDULES OF PUNISHMENT.

Definitions:
Punishment: "Occurs when stimulus change immediately follows a response and decreases the future frequency of that type of behavior in similar conditions." (Cooper Heron, & Heward, 2007)*
Legislation and agency policies limit the use of punishment. Lerman and Vorndran (2002) suggested that  punishment may be considered if:
The challenging behavior produces serious physical harm and has to be suppressed quickly
Reinforcement based treatments have not reduced the problem behavior to socially acceptable levels or 
The reinforcer maintaining the challenging behavior cannot be identified or withheld 

BACB Labels specific considerations regarding punishment in the ethical guideline 4.08
4.08 Considerations Regarding Punishment Procedures. 
Behavior analysts recommend reinforcement rather than punishment whenever possible. 
If punishment procedures are necessary, behavior analysts always include reinforcement procedures for alternative behavior in the behavior-change program. 
Before implementing punishment-based procedures, behavior analysts ensure that appropriate steps have been taken to implement reinforcement-based procedures unless the severity or dangerousness of the behavior necessitates immediate use of aversive procedures.
Behavior analysts ensure that aversive procedures are accompanied by an increased level of training, supervision, and oversight. Behavior analysts must evaluate the effectiveness of aversive procedures in a timely manner and modify the behavior-change program if it is ineffective. Behavior analysts always include a plan to discontinue the use of aversive procedures when no longer needed. (BACB, 2014, p.12-13)

Ethical Considerations Related to Punishment as outlined by Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007)
The right to safe and humane treatment
Least restrictive alternative
Right to effective treatment

Footnotes
Positive punishment may also be described as a type of aversive control
Negative side effects include: emotional or aggressive reactions, behavioral contrast, escape and avoidance of the punisher, modeling of inappropriate behavior and the overuse associated with negative reinforcement of the person presenting the punisher (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007)



Example:
Appropriate Use of Punishment as outlined by Cooper, Heron, and Heward (2007)
1.  Conduct a functional assessment
2. Attempt reinforcement based strategies (behavior as above does not reach socially acceptable levels)
3. Conduct punisher assessment
4. Ensure informed consent is given
5. Include reinforcement based strategies with punishment procedures
6. Ensure all staff are trained in the procedure and monitored closely
7. Use punishers of sufficient quality and magnitude
8. Use varied punishers
9. Deliver punisher at the beginning of a behavioral sequence
10. Punish each instance of the behavior Initially
11. Shift to intermittent schedule gradually
12. If delay in punishment use mediation
13. Supplement punishment with complementary interventions
14. Be prepared for negative side effects
15. Collect data, graph and evaluate daily
16. Discontinue procedure if a decrease in behavior is not observed

Write another example:












Questions to ask your supervisor:












Relevant Literature:  
Bailey, J., & Burch, M. (2011). Ethics for Behavior Analysts: 2nd Expanded Edition. Taylor & Francis.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. (2nd Ed.) Pearson Prentice Hall.
Foxx, R. M. (1982). Decreasing behaviors of severely retarded and autistic persons. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Houten, R., Axelrod, S., Bailey, J. S., Favell, J. E., Foxx, R. M., Iwata, B. A., & Lovaas, O. I. (1988).  The right to effective behavioral treatment.  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 21(4), 381-384.
Lerman, D. C., & Vorndran, C. M. (2002). On the status of knowledge for using punishment: Implications for treating behavior disorders. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 35(4), 431-464.
Iwata, B. A. (1988). The development and adoption of controversial default technologies. The Behavior Analyst, 11(2), 149.

Related Lessons:
D-16 Use positive and negative punishment
D-15 Identify punishers
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction
E-11 Use pairing procedures to establish new conditional reinforcers and punishers
G-07 Practice within one's limits of professional competence in applied behavior analysis, and obtain consultation, supervision, and training, or make referrals as necessary
J-10 When behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative behavior to be established or increased
FK-19 Unconditioned punishment
FK 20 Conditioned punishment
FK 21 Schedules of reinforcement and punishment
FK 38 Behavioral contrast

Notes:
