D-02 USE APPROPRIATE PARAMETERS AND SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT. 

Definition (Schedule of reinforcement): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created				Learned to fluency

While there are several variations of schedules of reinforcement, the two most basic concepts involve continuous schedules of reinforcement (CRF) and intermittent schedules of reinforcement (INT). A CRF is useful when teaching a new response because reinforcement is provided for each occurrence of the target behavior, therefore strengthening the desired response.  Conversely, an INT is in place when selected occurrences of the behavior are reinforced. INT are necessary for thinning schedules of reinforcement and transitioning to naturally occurring reinforcement contingencies.
INT may be defined as having a fixed ratio schedule, variable ratio schedule, fixed interval schedule, or variable interval schedule. When learning basic schedules of reinforcement, it is not only important to understand how the schedules are defined, but also understand the effects of each type of INT.  Ferster and Skinner (1957) and Cooper et al. (2007) thoroughly discuss these concepts and it is strongly encouraged that supervisors and supervisees read this material.

Examples:

Fixed Ratio (FR)
Variable Ratio (VR)
Fixed Interval (FI)
Variable Interval (VI)
Definition
A fixed number of target responses must be completed to produce a reinforcer.
A variable number of target responses must be completed to produce a reinforcer.
Reinforcement is provided for the first target response following a fixed duration of time.
Reinforcement is provided for the first target response following the end of variable durations of time.
Example
FR 7 means that every seventh target response produces a reinforcer.
VR 15 means that on average, every fifteenth target response produces a reinforcer.
FI 5 means that first target response following the end of a five minute period produces a reinforcer.
VI 12 means that the first target response following the end of an average duration of 12 minutes produces a reinforcer.

Schedule Effects
Produces a typical pattern of responding and high rates of responses.  Post reinforcement pause occurs.
Produces a consistent, steady response rate, usually without a post reinforcement pause.
Produces a post reinforcement pause during the initial part of the interval. Rate of responding accelerates toward the end of the interval but overall, slow to moderate rates of responding are observed.

Produces a constant, stable, yet low to moderate response rate.



Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Schedules of reinforcement. Applied Behavior Analysis (pp. 304-323). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Ferster, C. B., & Skinner, B. F. (1957). Schedules of reinforcement. New York, NY : Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Related Lessons: 
D-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction
D-20 Use response-independent (time-based) schedules of reinforcement (i.e., non-contingent reinforcement)
D-21 Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH)
FK-21 Schedules of reinforcement and punishment
FK-40 Matching law
FK-41 Contingency maintained behavior

Notes:
