D-01 USE POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE REINFORCEMENT. 

Definition (Positive Reinforcement): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Negative Reinforcement): 



(Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Example (Positive Reinforcement): 
A rat is in a cage, which has a food dispenser lever. To access food, the rat pushes the lever and food pellets are dispensed. In the future, after a few hours of food deprivation, the rat is more likely to push the lever to access food. 
A mommy sings a verse from “The Wheels on the Bus” nursery rhyme to her baby. The baby giggles immediately following the nursery rhyme being sung. The mommy is more likely to sing this nursery rhyme to her baby in the future, because the baby’s giggling serves as a reinforcer.

Example (Negative Reinforcement): 
A child asks her friend to turn down the music, as it is too loud for her. The music is immediately turned down. The child is more likely to ask for music to be turned down in the future when it is too loud.
It is raining so you put up your umbrella and immediately reduce the amount that you are getting wet. You are more likely to put up your umbrella in the future when it is raining to avoid getting wet. 

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:



Relevant Literature: 
Hall, R. V., Lund, D. & Jackson, D. (1968). Effects of teacher attention on study behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 1-12.
Hart, B. M., Reynolds, N. J., Baer, D. M., Brawley, E. R. & Harris, F. R. (1968). Effect of contingent and non-contingent social reinforcement on the cooperative play of a preschool child. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 73-76. 
Michael, J. (1975). Positive and negative reinforcement, a distinction that is no longer necessary; or a better way to talk about bad things. Behaviorism, 3 (1), 33-44.
Osborne, J. G. (1969). Free-time as a reinforcer in the management of classroom behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 2, 113-118.
Skinner, B. F. The behavior of organisms. New York: D. Appleton-Century, 1938.
Thomas, D. R., Becker, W. C., & Armstrong, M. (1968). Production and elimination of disruptive classroom behavior by systematically varying teacher's behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 35-45. 

Related Lessons:
C-01: State and plan for the possible unwanted side effects of reinforcement
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement
D-16: Use positive and negative punishment 
D-17: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement
D-19: Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction 
D-20: Use response-independent (time-based) schedules of reinforcement (i.e., noncontingent reinforcement)
D-21: Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DRO, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH)
E-10: Use the Premack principle
E-11: Use pairing procedures to establish new conditioned reinforcers and punishers
F-02: Use token economies and other conditioned reinforcement systems  
FK-14: Respondent conditioning (CS-CR)
FK-15: Operant conditioning
FK-17: Unconditioned reinforcement
FK-18: Conditioned reinforcement
FK-19: Unconditioned punishment
FK-20: Conditioned punishment
FK-21: Schedules of reinforcement and punishment
FK-23: Automatic reinforcement and punishment

Notes:
