B – 03 SYSTEMATICALLY ARRANGE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES TO DEMONSTRATE THEIR EFFECTS ON DEPENDENT VARIABLES.

Definition (Independent variable): 






















 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Dependent variable): 






















 (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007). 
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

 




Definition (Dependent variable guidelines): 






















 (Horner et al., 2005).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Definition (Experimental Control): 






















 (Horner et al., 2005).
Flashcard created			Learned to fluency

Example: 
A student consistently disrupts group activities. When given visuals for appropriate behavior (i.e., quiet voice, calm body) paired with gestural redirection, disruptive behavior in group lessons decreases. The teacher then takes the visuals away for a week to see if fading these supports would be an option. The gestural redirection for inappropriate behavior is still in place. The student’s disruptive behavior remains low. When the redirection is removed the following week. The student engages in increased disruptive behavior during this week, so the teacher decides to continue the gestural prompts and the disruptive behavior decreases again. 

Non-Example: 
A student with attention deficits consistently disrupts group activities. His teacher occasionally uses the visuals for appropriate behavior outlined in the BSP and the disruptive behavior does not decrease.

Write another example:




































Questions to ask your supervisor:





























Relevant Literature: 
Cooper, J.O., Heron, T.E. & Heward W.L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis (2nd Ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ. Pearson Prentice Hall. 
Horner, R.H., Carr, E.G., Halle, J., McGee, G., Odom, S., Wolery, M. (2005). The Use of Single-Subject Research to Identify Evidence-Based Practice in Special Education. Exceptional Children, 71, 2, 165-179. 

Related Lessons: 
B-04: Use withdrawal/reversal designs
B-05: Use alternating treatments (i.e., multi-element) designs
B-06: Use changing criterion designs
B-07: Use multiple baseline designs
B-09: Conduct a component analysis to determine the effective components of an intervention package
B-11: Conduct a parametric analysis to determine the effective values of an independent variable. 
H-04: Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability. 
I-01: Define behavior in observable and measureable terms.

Notes:
