K-06 PROVIDE SUPERVISION FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE AGENTS.

Smith, Parker, Taubman, and Lovaas (1992) found that knowledge transfer from a staff training workshop did not generalize to the group home.  Research suggests that training is most effective if there is training and ongoing supervision in the environment where the behavior change program is occurring (Parsons & Reed, 1995; Sarokoff & Sturmey, 2004; Miles & Wilder, 2009) 
Codding, Feinberg, Dunn and Pace (2004) found that treatment integrity increased following a one hour performance feedback session every other week.  Social validity ratings provided favorable feedback for the frequent supervisions. 
Cooper, Heron and Heward (2007) suggest that supervision of data takers and booster training is necessary to avoid observer drift. 
Observing and graphing data will provide immediate feedback on the participant's performance.  This can lead to quick decisions, modifications if necessary, or the termination of ineffective programs.  This supervision is necessary to create the most effective interventions and troubleshoot areas for improvement. It is also important to observe the intervention in the natural environment in order to determine if the intervention is realistic and practical in the natural environment.

Summary of Rationale for Supervision of Behavior Change Agents
Provides effective knowledge transfer for individuals implementing the intervention
Increases motivation and treatment integrity
Reduces error associated with data collection
Allows for quick clinical decisions to modify or terminate programs which ensures the most effective treatment

Write another example:



















Questions to ask your supervisor:















Relevant Literature:  
Codding, R. S., Feinberg, A. B., Dunn, E. K., & Pace, G. M. (2005). Effects of immediate performance feedback on implementation of behavior support plans. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 38(2), 205-219.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson Education, Inc.
Miles, N. I., & Wilder, D. A. (2009). The effects of behavioral skills training on caregiver implementation of guided compliance. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 42(2), 405-410.
Parsons, M. B., & Reid, D. H. (1995). Training residential supervisors to provide feedback for maintaining staff teaching skills with people who have severe disabilities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 28(3), 317-322.
Sarokoff, R. A., & Sturmey, P. (2004). The effects of behavioral skills training on staff implementation of discrete‐trial teaching. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37(4), 535-538.
Smith, T., Parker, T., Taubman, M., & Ivar Lovaas, O. (1992). Transfer of staff training from workshops to group homes: A failure to generalize across settings. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 13(1), 57-71.

Related Lessons:
H-03 Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
H-04 Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant qualitative relations
H-04 Evaluate changes in level, trend and variability.
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly.
K-03 Design and use competency-based training for persons who are responsible for carrying out behavioral assessment and behavior-change procedures.
K-04 Design and use effective performance monitoring and reinforcement systems.
Notes: