D-14 use listener training.

Definition:
Listener – “someone who provides reinforcement for verbal behavior” (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 2007, p. 698)
Part of being involved in a verbal community is reinforcing the behavior of speakers. There are several methods for training someone to respond as a listener. Skills such as vocal imitation (echoic), following instructions, answering questions (intraverbal), conversation skills (intraverbal), indicating objects, etc., all require listener behavior. 
Sundberg discusses a distinction between intraverbal and listener responding. “If the child’s response were verbal, then it would classified as intraverbal... but if the response were nonverbal it would be classified as listener behavior (or often termed receptive language or receptive labeling)” (Sundberg, 2008).
There are multiple protocols for receptive language training (cf., Fabrizio & Moors, 2001; Leaf & McEachin, 1999; Lovaas, 2003; Maurice, Green, & Luce, 1996). In a review of teaching receptive language to children with autism, Pelios and Sucharzewski (2004) point out that one must consider antecedent manipulations (e.g., within-stimulus prompts, keeping stimulus short, using topographically dissimilar responses) and consequence manipulations (e.g., rich reinforcement schedules, token economies, performance based breaks).  Also, they recommend systematically programming specific antecedent and consequence manipulations and requiring specific response requirements.

Example: 
A teacher conducting receptive language training tells her student “sit down” the student sits down and the teacher praises the student. The teacher then says “clap hands” the student claps hands and the teacher praises the student.
A teacher presents an array of fruit and says to the student, “give me the apple.” The student gives the teacher the apple and the teacher gives the student a token. 
Write another example:














Questions to ask your supervisor:















Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Fabrizio, M. S. (2001). A Brief Overview of Fluency-Based Instruction for Learners with Autism. Fabrizio/Moors Consulting, Seattle, Washington.
Leaf, R., & McEachin, J. (1999). A work in progress: Behavior management strategies and a curriculum for intensive behavioral treatment of autism. New York: DRL Books, LLC.
Lovaas, O. I. (2003). Teaching individuals with developmental delays: Basic intervention techniques. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Maurice C, Green G, Luce S, editors. Behavioral intervention for young children with autism: A manual for parents and professionals. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed; 1996.
Pelios, L. V., & Sucharzewski, A. (2004). Teaching receptive language to children with autism: A selective overview. The Behavior Analyst Today, 4(4), 378.
Schlinger, H. D. (2008). Listening Is Behaving Verbally. The Behavior Analyst,31(2), 145–161.
Sundberg, M. L. (2008). VB-MAPP Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program: a language and social skills assessment program for children with autism or other developmental disabilities: guide. Concord, CA: AVB Press. 

Related Lessons:
D-10 Use echoic training.
D-13 Use intraverbal training.
FK-43 Echoics
FK-44 Mands
FK-45 Tacts
FK-46 Intraverbals

Notes: