F-04 use precision teaching.

Precision teaching is a methodology of teaching which involves measuring performance of a learner and making changes based on these data. Precision teaching was proposed by Ogden Lindsley in 1964 in an article “Direct Measurement and Prosthesis of Retarded Behavior”. 
There are four steps of precision teaching process: 
1. Pinpoint - means to describe an actual movement which a learner needs to perform in a specific time interval to show an improvement on learning behavior.
2. Record - means that a learner or a teacher collect data on pinpointed behavior regularly and display these data graphically using the Standard Celeration Chart (the SCC). 
3. Change - means that the teacher analyzes the data using guidelines of analyzing the SCC (Graf & Lindsley, 2002) and quickly makes changes in a current instructional method if needed. 
4. Try Again - means that the teacher keeps exploring the best instructional methods for those learners who need more help and provides the learners with the opportunities to practice until the mastery level. 
Precision teaching follows four principles described by Kubina (2012): “(i) a focus on observable behavior, (ii) the use of frequency as data metric, (iii) graphing student performance data on a Standard Celeration Chart, and (iv) making decisions based on performance data” (As cited in Cooper, Heron, Heward, 2007, p. 142).

Example:
A teacher’s objective is to teach a student to say and write an answer when vocally asked simple math problems questions. The teacher will record how many times a student answers correctly in one minute interval. These data will be collected over the next several weeks and progress will be charted using a Standard Celebration Chart. Decisions about the teaching procedure will be made depending on the performance data.

Non- example:
A teacher’s objective is to teach students to solve simple math problems.  Percent correct are collected across the quarter. At the end of the quarter a report card will be sent to the student’s home.

Write another example:







Questions to ask your supervisor:







Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 139-144.
Cooper, J.O. (2000). Tutoring Joe: Winning with the precision teaching team. In W.L. Heward (ed.) Exceptional Children: An introduction to special education (6th ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill, 268-270.
Kerr, K.P., Smyth, P., & McDowell, C. (2003). Precision teaching children with autism: Helping design effective programmes. Early Childhood Development and Care, 173, 4, 399-410.
Hughes, J.C., Beverley, M., & Whitehead, J. (2007). Using precision teaching to increase the fluency of word reading with problem readers. European Journal of Behavior Analysis, 8, 221-238.
Kubina, R. M. (2012). Precision teaching book. [S.l.]: Greatness Achieved Pub Co.
Kubina, R.M., Morrison, R., & Lee, D.L. (2002). Benefits of adding precision teaching to behavioral interventions for students with autism. Behavioral Interventions, 17, 233-246.
Potts, L., Eshleman, J.W., & Cooper, J.O. (1993). Ogden R. Lindsley and the historical development of precision teaching. The Behavior Analyst, 2, 16, 177-189.
Related Lessons:
A-01: Measure frequency (i.e., count)
A-07: Measure trials to criterion.
F-03: Use Direction Instruction
H-01: Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of the behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
H-02: Select a schedule of observation and recording periods.
H-03: Select a data display that effectively communicates relevant quantitative relations.
H-04: Evaluate changes in level, trend, and variability.
H-05: Evaluate temporal relations between observed variables (within and between sessions, times series).
J-15: Base decision-making on data displayed in various formats.
FK-33: Functional relations.

Notes: