F-07 use functional communication training.

Definition:
Functional communication training (FCT) - “…an application of differential reinforcement of alternative behaviors (DRA) because the intervention develops an alternative communicative response as an antecedent to diminish the problem behavior” (Fisher, Kuhn, & Thompson, 1998, p. 543).
The alternative response can include vocalizations, sign language, communication boards and devices, picture cards, or gestures.
Carr and Durand (1985) used a two-step process to demonstrate how to deliver FCT.  First they completed a functional behavior assessment to identify the stimuli with known reinforcing properties that maintain the problem behavior, and second, they used those stimuli as reinforcers to develop an alternative behavior to replace the problem behavior.
Guidelines for the effective use of functional communication training include providing a dense schedule of reinforcement, fading prompts, and the appropriate reinforcement schedule thinning after the response is at strength.

Example:
Rob was throwing books at his teacher every time he was asked to do a math worksheet. After completing a functional analysis, Rob’s teacher found throwing books was maintained by access to escape. Rob was taught to ask for a break when he was doing math instead of throwing something at his teacher. This response, paired with pre-teaching and prompt fading, helped replace the problematic behavior.

Write another example:














Questions to ask your supervisor:















Relevant Literature:
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 494-496.
Durand, V.M. (1999). Functional communication training using assistive devices: Recruiting natural communities of reinforcement. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 32, 247-267.
Carr, E.G., & Durand, V.M. (1985). Reducing behavior problems through functional communication training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 18, 111-126.
Durand, V.M, & Carr, E.G. (1992). An analysis of maintenance following functional communication training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 777-794.
Fisher, W.W., Kuhn, D.E., & Thompson, R.H. (1998). Establishing discriminative control of responding using functional and alternative reinforcers during functional communication training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31, 543-560.
Hanley, G.P., Iwata, B.A., & Thompson, R.H. (2001). Reinforcement schedule thinning following treatment with functional communication training. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 34, 17-38. 

Related Lessons:
D-02: Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
D-03: Use prompts and prompt fading.
D-04: Use modeling and imitation training.
D-05: Use shaping.
D-10: Use echoic training.
D-11: Use mand training.
D-21: Use differential reinforcement (e.g., DR0, DRA, DRI, DRL, DRH)
E-01: Use interventions based on manipulation of antecedents, such as motivating operations and discriminative stimuli. 
I-03: Design and implement individualized behavioral assessment procedures.
I-04: Design and implement the full range of functional assessment procedures.

Notes: