J-10 WHEN A BEHAVIOR IS TO BE DECREASED, SELECT AN ACCEPTABLE ALTERNATIVE BEHAVIOR TO ESTABLISHED OR INCREASED.

Definition:
Differential reinforcement of alternative behavior (DRA) -  “a procedure for decreasing problem behavior in which reinforcement is delivered for a behavior that serves as desirable alternative to the behavior targeted for reduction and withheld following instances of the problem behavior” (Cooper, Heron & Heward, 2007, p. 693).  
When choosing a replacement behavior, it is often recommended to look at behavior that would serve the same function or would meet the same reinforcers for the problem behavior. This response could be using vocal-verbal behavior, exchanging a symbol, using sign language, or another form of communication. Consider the pros and cons of each mode. How quickly can the response be taught? Is it likely to be less or more effortful than the problem behavior? Will the new response meet reinforcement in natural settings?
Initially, the response to be taught should be reinforced on a continuous reinforcement schedule to ensure that the individual makes steady contact with the reinforcer and that this new replacement behavior occurs often and becomes strengthened in the individual’s repertoire. Once the new response is at strength, the DRA schedule should be thinned to reflect reinforcement rates that occur in the natural environment (e.g., a child learning to request for a break in lieu of eloping will not likely be granted a break every time he/she asks for one in a typical classroom environment). 
Some considerations when utilizing DRA include resurgence of challenging behavior when DRA schedules are thinned. There are several techniques that can be utilized to decrease this occurrence: increase the response requirement of the alternative response (e.g., if the alternate response is to ask for a break, allow a break only after completion of a set amount of work), provide a delay for reinforcement for the alternative response (e.g., provide a break after several minutes), decrease availability of alternative response materials (e.g. if break is requested utilizing a break card, limit amount of breaks or decrease presentation), and usage of a multiple schedule of reinforcement such as providing more reinforcement for completing work than for asking for a break (Sweeney & Shahan, 2013). 


Notes:
 

Write another example:



Questions to ask your supervisor:












Relevant Literature:
Athen, E.S., & Vollmer, T.R., (2010). An investigation of differential reinforcement of alternative behavior without extinction. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 43(4), 569-589.
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sweeney, M.M., & Shahan, T.A., (2013). Effects of high, low, and thinning rates of alternative reinforcement on response elimination and resurgence. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 100(1), 102-116. 
Vollmer, T. R., Roane, H. S., Ringdahl, J. E., & Marcus, B. A. (1999). Evaluating treatment challenges with differential reinforcement of alternative behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 32(1), 9-23.

Related Lessons:
D-02 Use appropriate parameters and schedules of reinforcement.
D-18. Use Extinction.
D.-19 Use combinations of reinforcement with punishment and extinction.
I-06 Make recommendations regarding behaviors that must be established, maintained, increased or decreased.
J-06 Select intervention strategies based on supporting environments.
J-07 Select intervention strategies based on environmental and resource constraints.
