K-03 DESIGN AND USE COMPETENCY BASED TRAINING FOR PERSONS WHO ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR CARRYING OUT BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE PROCEDURES.

Rationale
In order for staff and family members to collect accurate data and to carry out a behavior intervention plan effectively and consistently, all staff must receive training.  Inconsistent applications of procedures may lead to slow improvement or have effects that make behavior worse than before treatment.  

Training models
Much research has studied competency based training for staff, teachers and parents. Parsons and Reed (1995) increased staff performance by using classroom-based instruction, observation, and feedback on the work site.  Shore et al. (1995) provided training in data collection, calculation, and review of treatment procedure, followed by training in treatment implementation in-situ with feedback and assistance.  A third phase of instructing supervisors how to train direct service providers was implemented.  Sarokoff and Sturmey (2004) provided staff with a written definition of the plan, feedback regarding their baseline performance, rehearsal with reinforcement and corrective feedback, and in-situ modeling and rehearsal for 10 minutes.  Miles and Wilder (2009) used Behavior Skills Training (BST) that involved providing a written description, reviewing baseline performance, rehearsal and feedback, and then repeating modeling and rehearsal until the staff completed three trials accurately.

BST has also been used to train individuals to conduct behavioral assessments such as functional analyses. For example, Iwata et al. (2000) and Lambert, Bloom, Clay, Kunnavatanna, and Collins (2014) trained participants to conduct functional analysis conditions with adequate fidelity. 

Elements of competency-based training
Clear instructions
Modeling
Rehearsal
Feedback 
Repetition until skills mastered
Treatment Integrity data monitored

Threats to accuracy and reliability
Poor staff training can lead to inaccurate baseline, functional assessment and treatment data.  Systematic training of occurrence and nonoccurrence and other critical data collection information and providing booster training will help to minimize the following challenges:
Observer drift
Observer reactivity


Write another example:


























































Questions to ask your supervisor:




 


































































Relevant Literature:  
Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied Behavior Analysis: 2nd Edition. Pearson 
      	 Education, Inc..
Iwata, B. A., Wallace, M. D., Kahng, S., Lindberg, J. S., Roscoe, E. M., Conners, J., ... & Worsdell, A. S. (2000). Skill acquisition in the implementation of functional analysis methodology. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 33(2), 181-194.
Lambert, J. M., Bloom, S. E., Clay, C. J., Kunnavatana, S. S., & Collins, S. D. (2014). Training residential staff and supervisors to conduct traditional functional analyses. Research in developmental disabilities, 35(7), 1757-1765.
Miles, N. I., & Wilder, D. A. (2009). The effects of behavioral skills training on caregiver implementation of guided compliance. Journal of applied behavior analysis, 42(2), 405-410.
Parsons, M. B., & Reid, D. H. (1995). Training residential supervisors to provide feedback for maintaining staff teaching skills with people who have severe disabilities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 28(3), 317-322.
Sarokoff, R. A., & Sturmey, P. (2004). The effects of behavioral skills training on staff implementation of discrete‐trial teaching. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37(4), 535-538.
Shore, B. A., Iwata, B. A., Vollmer, T. R., Lerman, D. C., & Zarcone, J. R. (1995). Pyramidal staff training in the extension of treatment for severe behavior disorders. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 28(3), 323-332.

Related Lessons:
D-04 Use modeling and imitation training
D-05 Use shaping
E-03 Use instructions and rules
F-03 Use direct instruction
K-02 Identify the contingencies governing the behavior of those responsible for carrying out behavior-change procedures and design interventions accordingly

Notes: